Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 361 
Externalities and Environmental Economics
An externality exists when the actions or decisions of one person or group impose a cost or 
bestow a benefit on second or third parties. Externalities are sometimes called spillovers or 
 neighborhood effects. Inefficient decisions result when decision makers fail to consider social costs 
and benefits.
The presence of externalities is a significant phenomenon in modern life. Examples are 
everywhere: Air, water, land, sight, and sound pollution; traffic congestion; automobile  accidents; 
abandoned housing; nuclear accidents; and secondhand cigarette smoke are only a few. Reports 
of melting ice caps have fueled worry among scientists and others across the world about global 
warming. Concern about air quality is a major political issue in much of the  developing world. 
The study of externalities is a major concern of environmental economics.
The growth of China and India has put increased pressure on the environment. As new 
countries industrialize, strains on global air and water systems are inevitable. We have become 
increasingly aware of the global nature of externalities.
Marginal Social Cost and Marginal Cost Pricing
In the absence of externalities, when a firm weighs price and marginal cost to decide output, it is 
weighing the full benefits to society of additional production against the full costs to society of 
that production. Those who benefit from the production of a product are the people or house-
holds who end up consuming it. The price of a product is a good measure of what an additional 
unit of that product is “worth” because those who value it more highly already buy it. People 
who value it less than the current price are not buying it. If marginal cost includes all costs—that 
is, all costs to society—of producing a marginal unit of a good, additional production will be 
efficient, provided P is greater than MC. Up to the point where P = MC , each unit of produc-
tion yields benefits in excess of cost. Figure 16.1(a) shows a firm and an industry in which no 
externalities exist.
Suppose, however, that the production of the firm’s product imposes external costs on 
society as well. A firm producing detergent may dump wastewater into a local river as a by-
product of its detergent production, affecting the local community. A steel firm may produce 
carbon emissions as well as steel, contributing both to air pollution and global warming. These 
are costs of producing steel or detergent just as much as is the labor or capital costs of making 
those goods. What would happen to the firm and industry in Figure 16.1(a) if we made the firms 
responsible financially for the external costs they impose? Figure 16.1(b) shows what happens 
graphically when we add the external costs to the financial costs of the firm. The curve labeled 
MSC, marginal social cost, is the sum of the marginal cost of producing the product and the cor-
rectly measured marginal external cost involved in the process of production.
When we correctly include the external costs in the firm’s budget, the firm’s marginal 
costs rise, shifting up to the curve labeled MSC on the right hand side of Figure 16.1(b). The 
industry supply curve, which is just the sum of the marginal cost curves of the firms in the 
industry, also then shifts up to the curve labeled S' in the figure. A new equilibrium occurs at 
the intersection of the original demand curve and the new supply curve and now embeds the 
full cost of production of this good. The new price is P**, and each firm chooses quantity q**, 
which equates its new higher marginal cost with the industry price. Industry output at the 
optimum is Q**.
Notice what has happened. Making the firms responsible for their external costs increases 
the costs they see. This reduces firm and industry output and increases the price. Fewer units 
will be sold, but the price they are sold at will now reflect all the costs of production, both 
 private and social.
We can also use Figure 16.1 to show what happens when decision makers are not made 
responsible for the external costs they impose. Without being charged for their external costs, 
firms will continue to produce at q*, and the industry will produce at Q*, charging the price P*. 
You can see that the industry is producing too much output. In particular, it overproduces by 
Q*−Q**. There is a social loss from this over production. We can see the costs of producing 
these units by reading along the MSC curve between Q** and Q*. It is labeled in the figure as 
16.1 Learning Objective
Understand the market failure 
associated with externalities 
and the possible solutions to 
this set of issues.
externality Actions of one 
party impose costs or benefits 
on a second party.
marginal social cost (MSC)  
The total cost to society of  
producing an additional unit of 
a good or service. MSC is equal 
to the sum of the marginal cost 
of producing the product and 
the correctly measured mar-
ginal external cost involved in 
the process of production.
362 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
segment AB. The value of these extra units can be seen by looking at the demand curve, which is 
shown in the figure as the segment AC. We can see easily that these added units generate more 
cost than their value to consumers. That is what we mean when we say there is overproduction 
or that the production level is inefficient. Indeed the triangle ABC is a measure of the efficiency 
loss from this overproduction. It should look familiar as it parallels the deadweight loss from 
 underproduction in the monopoly case and was also covered in another context in Chapter 4.
The analysis thus far should give you some insight into the kinds of policy solutions likely 
to help in the environmental area. The central issue in externalities is that some decisions are 
being made without taking into account full costs. Solutions will thus involve figuring out ways 
to make individuals and firms take these costs into account. Sometimes this process is called 
“internalizing the externalities.” We will discuss some policy options later in this chapter.
Acid Rain and the Clean Air Act 
Acid rain is an excellent example of an externality and 
of the issues and conflicts involved in dealing with externalities. When manufacturing firms 
and power plants in the Midwest burn coal with a high-sulfur content, smoke from those plants 
mixes with moisture in the atmosphere. The result is a dilute acid that is windblown north to 
Canada and east to New York and New England, where it falls to Earth as rain. The same sources 
produce acid rain in Germany, Sweden, and Norway.
How does the acid rain problem look to the different parties involved? For manufacturing 
firms and public utilities generating the sulfur dioxide that creates acid rain, burning high-sulfur 
coal delivers cheap power and employment to residents of the Midwest. Paying to clean up the 
damage or changing the fuel mix to reduce sulfur would result in higher electricity prices. Some 
firms would likely go out of business, and jobs would be lost. For residents in other parts of 
a. A proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrm: No externalities
The industry
A representative ﬁrm
b.  A proﬁt-maximizing ﬁrm: Externality
The industry
A representative ﬁrm
Units of output
Units of output
Price per unit ($)
0
0
P*
P*
Q*
q*
MC
D
S
Units of output
Units of output
Price per unit ($)
0
0
P**
P*
P**
P*
Q*
Q**
q*
q**
D
C
A
B
S'
S
MSC
MC
Marginal
external
cost
▸
▸FiguRe 16.1 Profit 
Maximizing Firm 
With and Without 
externalities
(a) Without externalities, 
 optimum output Q* is produced 
at the level where P = MC.
(b) With externalities, Q* is 
 inefficient and the optimum 
 output is Q**. The price has 
risen from P* to P**.
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 363 
the United States and Canada, particularly those near wildlife areas, the burning of high-sulfur 
coal and the resulting acid rain results in fish kills and deforestation. Often these citizens are 
far enough away from the power plants producing the sulfur dioxide that they are not even 
 benefiting from the cheaper power. As in many areas of economics, the hard issue here is how 
to  balance benefits to one set of claimants with costs to another.
In complex cases of externalities, like acid rain, governments often get involved. The United 
States began its regulatory work in reducing acid rain with the Clean Air Act in 1990. Since 
then, the United States has made substantial progress in reducing the problem of acid rain, and 
many acidified lakes and streams now once again support fish life. Recently, the United States 
has employed an innovative “cap-and-trade” program to control emissions, which we will 
 discuss later in this chapter. For acid rain, which travels across national boundaries, agreements 
between Canada and the United States have also played an important role.
Other externalities Clearly, the most significant and hotly debated issue of externalities is 
global warming. The 2007 Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to former Vice President Al Gore and 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a group of 2,500 researchers from 130 nations 
that issued a number of reports linking human activity to the recent rise of the average tempera-
ture on Earth. Although there is some disagreement, most scientists predict that absent a change 
in policy major adverse consequences such as dramatically rising sea levels are likely. The global 
E co no m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
Adjusting to an Environmental Disaster: The Dust Bowl
In economics we often distinguish between short- and 
 long-run effects of various policies or actions. Whether we 
think about consumer reactions to price increases or firm 
reactions to cost increases or demand shifts, we normally 
assume that the ability of people and institutions to react to 
these new circumstances as time passes softens their impact. 
The same arguments have been applied in environmental 
areas, including the case of global warning, where it is argued 
that changing patterns of agriculture and overall land use can 
mitigate some of the economic consequences of tempera-
ture increases. A recent, interesting study of the short- and 
long-run effects of the U.S. Dust Bowl in the 1930s provides 
a counterpoint.1
In the late nineteenth century, as agriculture spread 
through the plains in the United States, grasslands were 
replaced by crops. When times were good and rainfall ade-
quate, farms and farmers thrived. But in the 1930s the U.S. 
plains experienced a severe drought, with large-scale crop 
failure. Subsequent dust storms blew topsoil off the lands, 
creating what some dubbed black Sundays, as valuable soil 
from Oklahoma, Texas, and the Dakotas ended up in the 
Atlantic Ocean. By the 1940s many of the plains areas had 
lost almost three-fourths of their topsoil cover. The conse-
quence was an eroded landscape, with a much diminished 
ability to sustain crops and families. Many of you will have 
read John Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath, which describes 
the travails of the Joad family as they left their home in 
Oklahoma to head to California in this period.
Hornbeck’s recent work asks the question: How long 
did it take for the U.S. plains to recover from this man-
made environmental disaster? His conclusion? Large and 
Thinking PrACTiCAlly
1. Why do you think adjustment to the Dust Bowl was 
so slow?
1 Richard Hornbeck, “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: 
Short and Long Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe” American 
Economic Review, June 2012, 1477–1507.
widespread economic effects were felt throughout the 
1940s and 1950s and most of the long-run adjustment 
occurred not with recovery of the plains or a change in 
crop choice but with the movement of people out of the 
region much as Steinbeck described. Perhaps for environ-
mental recovery and readjustment, the long run may be 
long indeed.
364 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
nature of the problem, coupled with the fact that warming will hurt some countries—those with 
big coastlines and warm current temperatures—more than others makes finding a solution to 
this issue especially hard.
Individual actions can also create externalities. When I drive during rush hour, I increase 
congestion faced by other drivers. If I smoke, your health may be compromised. Again the key 
issue is weighing the costs and benefits to all parties.
Some examples of Positive externalities 
Thus far we have described a series of negative 
externalities. But externalities can also be positive. In some cases, when other people or firms 
engage in an activity, there are side benefits from that activity. From an economics perspective, 
there are problems with positive externalities as well.
Ian Ayres and Steve Levitt have studied a fascinating example of a product with positive 
externalities, LoJack. LoJack is a device that allows police to track a car when it is stolen. When a 
car has a LoJack device installed, the gains to stealing that car are sharply reduced. These devices 
not only help recover cars but also help catch car thieves. Suppose that 90 percent of the cars in 
a community had LoJack installed. If all LoJack cars were identified—the way houses are that 
have burglar alarms—potential thieves could look for the unmarked cars. As it happens, LoJack 
does not come with any identifying mark. From a thief’s perspective, any car has a 90 percent 
chance of having a LoJack installed. As a result, the benefits from stealing any car are reduced. 
With reduced benefits, fewer thefts occur. Ayres and Levitt have found that the size of these 
positive externalities are large; they estimate that the purchaser of a LoJack captures, as an indi-
vidual, only 10 percent of the value of the device.1
We also see positive externalities in the case of vaccinations. The more people who are 
 vaccinated, and thus less likely to become ill, the less likely it is that a disease will spread. But 
the less likely the disease, the lower the private benefits to people from getting a vaccination. 
With communicable diseases, health precautions taken by an individual have positive external 
 benefits to the rest of the community.
The problem with positive externalities should now be clear. For this type of externality, 
the individuals in charge have too little incentive to engage in the activity. Too few LoJacks are 
bought; too few people wash their hands often; too few people would vaccinate their children 
unless forced to do so by school systems.
Costs and Benefits of Pollution
If you look back at Figure 16.1, you will see that the optimum amount of output for the  pollution- 
emitting firm analyzed in the figure is positive. This tells us that at the optimum this firm is pro-
ducing emissions, with some cost to the environment. In general, we will find that at the optimum 
the level of emissions of most pollutants is not zero. This may surprise you but is an important 
application of economics to a serious world issue.
Note that the title of this subsection has both “costs” and “benefits” in it. The social costs of 
pollution are likely clear to you. They might include health problems from smog or loss of fish 
species from water pollution. But what are the social benefits of pollution? The social benefits of 
pollution are the costs we avoid by not eliminating the pollution while still being able to enjoy the 
goods that create the pollution in the first place. You could eliminate the carbon you emit by not 
driving, but that would have a cost to you. Or you could turn in your gas-powered car and buy 
a hybrid, which would cost money. Not doing those things is a benefit to you, one that we want 
to weigh against the costs to society of having you drive. Similarly, a steel plant gets a benefit 
from pollution both from the profits it earns selling steel and from avoiding costs of refitting the 
steel plant. The marginal social benefit of pollution is the incremental benefit to society from 
 producing one more unit of pollution. The benefit is the cost saved from polluting.
We can use this idea to determine the optimum amount of pollution in a society. The goal 
is to use the absorptive capacity of our environment as efficiently as possible. The principle we 
1 Ian Ayres and Steven D. Levitt, “Measuring Positive Externalities from Unobservable Victim Precautions: An Empirical 
Analysis of Lojack,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 108, (1), 1998.
marginal social benefit of 
 pollution The incremental 
benefit to society from produc-
ing one more unit of pollution.
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 365 
will apply should be familiar to you from other contexts. Each unit of pollution that is emitted 
has a marginal social cost, borne by society, perhaps in the form of health losses or lost recre-
ational opportunities from polluted waterways. Continuing to produce that unit of pollution 
also has a benefit, represented by the marginal social benefit of pollution. Again, the benefit 
comes from resources saved in not having to eliminate the externality. We compare the two. 
If an incremental unit of pollution has a marginal social benefit in excess of its marginal social 
cost, we produce it; otherwise we do not. In other words, if on the margin society benefits more 
from controlling the emission than it costs to do that control, then the emission is controlled. 
Otherwise it is not. At the optimum, the marginal social cost of pollution emitted will exactly 
equal the marginal social benefit from emissions.
Figure 16.2 presents this analysis graphically. Along the horizontal axis we measure the 
level of pollution; here we have used tons of carbon emitted. On the vertical axis we represent 
the marginal social cost of experiencing carbon emissions (green line) and the marginal social 
benefit from pollution (purple line). It is interesting to think about the slopes of these two 
curves. As we increase emissions levels, the MSC increases; the MSC curve slopes up. This tells 
us that as we increase emissions the added cost of one more unit of  emissions goes up. For 
many pollutants the environment can absorb low levels reasonably well, so marginal costs 
at low levels are low. As we dump more pollutants into the environment, however, the harm 
to nature generally increases. Adding a little bit of smoke to a clear sky may have little effect 
as it dissipates; adding that same smoke to an already hazy sky may have serious health con-
sequences. In some cases the MSC curve may increase quite dramatically as the environment 
approaches a saturation point. The marginal social benefit curve shown in the figure has, by 
contrast, a downward slope. At high levels of emissions (to the right), there are often cheap 
ways to eliminate some emissions. Cutting back a ton of carbon  emissions at this level may be 
quite cheap. Thus, the benefits from being able to pollute are small. In the driving example, it 
is easy to think of some trips you could avoid taking at all with little  detriment. As we cut back 
emissions, however, moving to the left on the graph, technology for reductions may reach a 
limit and eliminating the last little bit of pollution may in fact be  possible only by  eliminating 
production altogether. If you had to give up driving altogether, that lost benefit might be high 
indeed.
We see the optimum emissions level in Figure 16.2 is Q*, found at the intersection of the 
MSC and MSB curves. At this point, society is using its environment most efficiently, weighing 
the reduction in costs from experiencing pollution against the lost benefits from changing con-
sumption or investing resources in mitigation.
Drawing the marginal curves as we have done and identifying the optimal level of pollution 
is a relatively straightforward application of the principles of marginalism that we have covered 
often in this text. It is a more difficult challenge to empirically measure these curves. The MSC of 
emissions ranges from health costs, to aesthetics, to loss of species diversity, or even to increases 
Quantity of
carbon
emitted (tons)
Social optimum
MSB
MSC
Marginal social
cost; marginal
social benefit
Q*
▸
◂FiguRe 16.2 Socially 
Optimal Polution Level
At the optimum, Q*, marginal 
social benefit equals marginal 
social cost.
366 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
in risks to populations from rising sea levels. Many of these risks are uncertain. Environmental 
economists working with natural scientists have spent considerable time trying to provide rea-
sonable estimates of what these costs might be. Nor is it easy to estimate the marginal social 
benefit curves, which requires us to assess the costs of technological solutions to emissions 
problems.
We have explored externalities and, focusing on pollution, have seen the characteristics of 
an optimal solution to the externality problem. But how do we move to the optimal level? Here 
there is much debate, both about how much progress can be made by private action and about 
the right type of government policy instruments to use.
Internalizing Externalities
A number of mechanisms are available to provide decision makers with incentives to weigh 
the external costs and benefits of their decisions, a process called internalization. In some cases, 
externalities are internalized through bargaining and negotiation without government involve-
ment. In other cases, private bargains fail and the only alternative may be government action of 
some kind.
Four approaches have been taken to solving the problem of externalities: (1) private bargain-
ing and negotiation, (2) environmental standards, (3) government-imposed taxes and subsidies, 
and (4) sale or auctioning of rights to impose externalities. Although each is best suited for a dif-
ferent set of circumstances, all provide decision makers with an incentive to weigh the external 
effects of their decisions.
Private Bargaining and Negotiation 
Many of you probably live in dormitories. Now 
and again you may have found yourself with a neighbor who is much noisier than you would 
like. For you the noise is an externality, one that prevents you from either sleeping or studying. 
For the neighbor, the noise has its benefits, likely produced by a party. How do you handle this 
externality? For most people in this situation, the first step is obvious: Knock on the neigh-
bor’s door and ask him to be quieter. In fact, good manners are a societal reaction to incipient 
 externalities. As societies increase in population density, more and more activities fall under the 
category of “not done in public.” Consider what has happened over time to the social accept-
ability of smoking, for example. Even fashion can create externalities. In 2010, in anticipation of 
its Expo, the Chinese government cracked down on the tendency of its citizens in Shanghai to 
wear their pajamas outside the home, believing that this attire has negative externalities for their 
international guests.
Even when there are no social norms against an activity, private bargains and negotiation 
can often solve an externality problem. The first formal model of how private negotiations 
might work in this setting was described by Ronald Coase in 1960.2 The Coase theorem, which 
is a staple topic in both law and economics classes, tells us that under certain conditions, private 
bargaining can solve the externality problem without government action.
To see how the Coase theorem works, let us return to the problem of your noisy neighbor. 
Suppose your polite request has been turned down and that this neighbor parties every day. 
How might the Coase theorem help us here? How can we use bargaining to help us get some 
sleep? Coase would tell us that the first step is to learn what the rules are; it will turn out that it 
won’t matter what the rules are, only that both parties to a dispute know the rules. Negotiations 
are difficult when the two parties don’t agree on who has what rights. Let us assume, at least 
at first, that in your dormitory there are no rules against noise and that everyone in the dorm 
is aware of this lenient policy. In a system with no rules and a rude neighbor, do you have any 
recourse?
Coase would answer yes. If your neighbor has the right to make noise all the time and you 
object to that noise, you can try to pay him not to make so much noise. If your neighbor is party-
ing every day, it is likely that diminishing returns have set in. His first party of the month might 
2 See Ronald Coase, “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics, 1960. Coase won the 1991 Nobel Prize in 
Economics.
Coase theorem Under  certain 
conditions, when externalities 
are present, private  parties 
can arrive at the efficient 
solution without government 
involvement.
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 367 
be worth a good deal to him, but by the time party 30 comes around, even he might be tired of the 
noise and mess! By day 30 of noise, you likely would value quiet a good deal. With nonstop par-
tying, it is likely that your marginal cost from the noise of the last party exceeds your neighbor’s 
marginal benefit from that noise. In short, current noise levels are socially inefficient and there is 
room for a deal! Of course, as your neighbor cuts back in his partying because of your bribes, his 
value of the marginal hour of noise goes up, and the marginal cost to you of listening begins to 
fall. At some point, you can no longer bribe the neighbor to be quiet because his marginal benefit 
from one more noisy party exceeds its cost to you. We have reached a socially optimal level of 
noise. Notice this level balances your value of silence against your neighbor’s benefit from noise.
Suppose, on the other hand, your dormitory had strict noise rules. Now the neighbor who 
wanted to party would have to bribe you not to report him. Again we would expect payments 
to continue as long as there was a difference in marginal values. In the end, exactly the same 
amount of partying would go on, one that just balanced the interests of the people involved. 
Coase tells us that the optimal level, in which the marginal cost from experiencing the external-
ity exactly equals the marginal benefit from that externality, will be achieved no matter how the 
original property rights are arranged. All that differs is who is paying whom.
We learn from Coase that under certain conditions, private negotiations will push society 
to the right level of output even with externalities. What features of a situation are required for 
this type of solution to work? First, as noted, basic rights must be understood by all parties. If 
rights are not spelled out, arguments about who has what right interfere with the bargaining 
process. A second condition is that people must be able to bargain without impediment or costs. 
When people live next to one another, bargaining is a lot easier. Finally, private negotiation 
works best when the number of parties involved is few in number. If one party to a bargain is a 
large group, such as all residents of a town or a large area as in the previous acid rain example, 
private negotiations work less well.
In some cases, especially involving neighbors, the offer of compensation might be made in 
some form other than cash. You may offer your dormmate goodwill, a favor or two, or help with 
his school work. In this example, rather than using bribes, you might just pay to insulate your 
room. Of course, your willingness to do this would depend on how much insulation costs, how 
much you suffered from the noise, and how long you expected to live next door.
Coase’s critics are quick to point out that the conditions required for bargaining to produce 
the efficient result are not always present. The biggest problem with Coase’s system is also a 
common problem. Often one party to a bargain is a large group of people, and our reasoning 
may be subject to a fallacy of composition.
Suppose a power company in Pittsburgh is polluting the air. The damaged parties are the 
100,000 people who live near the plant. Let us assume the plant has the right to pollute. The 
Coase theorem predicts that the people who are damaged by the smoke will get together and 
offer a bribe. If the bribe is sufficient to induce the power plant to stop polluting or reduce the 
pollutants with air scrubbers, it will accept the bribe and cut down on the pollution. If the bribe 
is not sufficient, the pollution will continue, but the firm will have weighed all the costs and 
the result will be efficient.
However, not everyone will contribute to the bribe fund. First, each contribution is so small 
relative to the whole that no single contribution makes much of a difference. Making a contri-
bution may seem unimportant or unnecessary to some. Second, all people get to breathe the 
cleaner air whether they contribute to the bribe or not. Many people will not participate simply 
because they are not compelled to, and the private bargain breaks down—the bribe that the 
group comes up with will be less than the full damages unless everyone participates. (We discuss 
these two problems—the drop-in-the-bucket and the free-rider—later in this chapter.) When the 
number of damaged parties is large, government taxes or regulation may be the only avenue to 
a remedy.
As we have just seen, for bargaining to result in an efficient outcome, the initial assignment 
of rights must be clear to both parties. When rights are established by law, more often than not 
some mechanism to protect those rights is also built into the law. In some cases where a  nuisance 
exists, for example, there may be legal remedies. In such cases, the victim can go to court and ask 
for an injunction that forbids the damage-producing behavior from continuing.
Injunctive remedies are irrelevant when the damage has already been done. Consider acci-
dents. If your leg has already been broken as the result of an automobile accident, enjoining the 
injunction A court order 
forbidding the continua-
tion of behavior that leads to 
damages.
368 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
driver of the other car from drinking and driving will not work—it is too late. In these cases, 
rights must be protected by liability rules, rules that require A to compensate B for  damages 
imposed. In theory, such rules are designed to do the same thing that taxing a polluter is 
designed to do: provide decision makers with an incentive to weigh all the consequences, actual 
and potential, of their decisions. Just as taxes do not stop all pollution, liability rules do not stop 
all accidents.
However, the threat of liability actions does induce people to take more care than they 
might otherwise. Product liability is a good example. If a person is damaged in some way 
because a product is defective, the producing company is, in most cases, held liable for the 
damages, even if the company took reasonable care in producing the product. Producers have 
a powerful incentive to be careful. If consumers know they will be generously compensated for 
any damages, however, they may not have as powerful an incentive to be careful when using the 
product.
environmental Standards 
One of the most important policy tools used to deal with 
externalities are standards, rules that directly govern how firms and individuals who produce 
externalities behave.
Direct regulation of externalities takes place at federal, state, and local levels. The Environ-
mental Protection Agency (EPA) is a federal agency established by an act of Congress in 1970. 
Since the 1960s, Congress has passed a great deal of legislation that sets specific  standards 
for permissible discharges into the air and water. Every state has a division or department 
charged with regulating activities that are likely to harm the environment. Most airports in 
the United States have landing patterns and hours that are regulated by local governments to 
minimize noise.
Many criminal penalties and sanctions for violating environmental regulations are like the 
taxes imposed on polluters. Not all violations and crimes are stopped, but violators and crimi-
nals face “costs.” For the outcome to be efficient, the penalties they expect to pay should reflect 
the damage that their actions impose on society.
How strict should the standards be that the government imposes? This is a question we have 
already answered! Look back at Figure 16.2. We see from this that looking at both benefits and 
costs, we find the optimal level of pollution is Q*. In setting standards, most economists believe 
that the government should be trying to set rules so that Q* is achieved. The goal of policy is to set 
up rules such that decision makers end up producing the optimal level of emissions.
It turns out that under some common circumstances, setting standards to achieve Q* will 
be difficult. Standards often involve setting rules on how firms produce. For example, we might 
require firms to install filters on the top of their smokestacks to reduce their emissions. But 
specifying what firms should do often results in higher costs for reducing pollution than we 
could achieve in other ways. Forcing a utility plant to install a filter might be much more expen-
sive than allowing it to cut emissions by the same amount by changing the type of fuel it burns. 
It is hard to use standards to encourage firms to choose the right technology to reduce emis-
sions. When firms creating the externality have different marginal costs of reducing their pol-
lution, it is also difficult to find the right standard to set. In these circumstances, when methods 
to reduce emissions are varied, and polluters differ widely in their ability to control emissions, 
most economists favor managing externalities by turning to a type of price system, using either 
taxes or a tradable permits market.
Taxes and Subsidies 
When private negotiations fail, economists have traditionally advo-
cated marginal taxes and subsidies as a direct way of forcing firms to consider external costs or 
benefits. When a firm imposes an external social cost, the reasoning goes, a per-unit tax should 
be imposed equal to the damages of each successive unit of output produced by the firm—the 
tax should be exactly equal to marginal external costs.3
liability rules laws that 
require A to compensate B for 
damages that A imposed on B.
3 As we discuss later in this chapter, damage costs are difficult to measure. It is often assumed that they are proportional to the 
volume of pollutants discharged into the air or water. Instead of taxes, governments often impose effluent charges, which make the 
cost to polluters proportional to the amount of pollution caused. We will use tax to refer to both taxes and effluent charges.
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 369 
Return to look at Figure 16.1(b). We saw in this figure how a firm would do the right thing 
in terms of emissions if only it faced the right marginal cost curve, the MSC. We can use the tax 
system to do exactly this! Suppose we impose a tax on this firm exactly equal to the marginal 
external cost it imposes on society. The firm now faces a marginal cost curve that is the same as 
the marginal social cost curve—its marginal cost curve is now MSC. It experiences the external-
ity cost as a financial cost; it pays the government taxes to “use” the environment, just as it pays 
workers to use their labor. Remember that the industry supply curve is the sum of the marginal 
cost curves of the individual firms. This means that as a result of the tax, the industry supply 
curve shifts to the left, driving output down to the optimal level and the price up. Because a 
profit-maximizing firm equates price with marginal cost, the new price to consumers covers 
the resource costs of producing the product and the external costs created by the pollution that 
results from these goods being produced. The consumer decision process is once again efficient 
at the margin because marginal social benefit as reflected in market price is equal to the full 
social marginal cost of the product.
We argued previously that standards sometimes created problems when there are multiple 
ways to reduce emissions and when firms differ in the marginal benefits they received from pol-
luting (or thought of another way, their marginal costs of cleaning up). Emission taxes will work 
much better in this regard. Suppose in drawing the marginal social benefit curve in Figure 16.2 
we were combining information from two different polluters. One firm, A, finds it easy to avoid 
polluting. Perhaps it is a new plant, easily able to switch to a different type of fuel. For A, the 
marginal benefit of polluting is relatively low because avoiding that pollution is easy. A second 
firm, B, is old and can stop polluting only at great expense. Ideally, if we want to reduce as much 
pollution as possible per dollar, we should have the firm that can reduce pollution cheaply do 
more of it. And that is exactly what a tax will do. If the government sets a tax at $10 per ton of 
carbon emitted, both firms will take actions that reduce carbon as long as those actions cost 
them less than $10 per ton. For Firm A, there may be many such actions, so it will cut back a lot 
before it becomes too expensive to do any more. For Firm B, perhaps little reduction will occur. 
Both firms will look across technological solutions to find the ones that reduce emissions at the 
lowest costs. In the end, the key policy goal is to make sure the right amount of total reduction 
occurs, and taxes will accomplish this at lower costs than will a standard.
Figure 16.3 shows us how a tax would work for Firms A and B. Before we impose a tax, 
each firm is polluting at its maximum level, thinking of pollution as free. Each firm produces 
Q0 worth of emissions. Total industry emissions is thus 2Q0. Suppose now the government, 
based on information about both firms and about the MSCs of emissions, wants to reduce 
emissions in half to Q0. Looking at the information it has gathered, it sets the tax at T*. Every 
unit of emissions produced by the firm costs it T*, so you can think of T* as the per-unit price 
of emissions.
Look first at Firm A. At its original level of emissions, Q0, the tax per unit is quite a bit 
higher than the marginal benefit it gets from polluting. So it starts to cut back using whatever 
Emissions (tons)
Marginal
benefit (MB)
to
firm
$
tax = T*
QA
MBA
MBB
½QO
QB
QO
▸
◂FiguRe 16.3 
 
Optimal emissions Taxes 
for Firms with Different 
Marginal Benefit Curves
if a per-unit tax exactly equal 
to marginal external costs is 
imposed on a firm, the firm will 
weigh the tax against its  marginal 
benefits from polluting and 
choose an optimal emissions 
level. here two firms differ in 
their marginal benefits and thus 
choose different levels. in equilib-
rium each firm chooses a level so 
that the MSB = the tax. The result 
is that the optimal pollution level 
is achieved at the lowest costs.
370 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
 technological opportunities it has. As long as the price of the emission is more than the benefit 
to the firm of not cleaning up, the firm reduces its emissions. For firm A, emissions fall all the 
way to QA. At that point, it is too expensive to cut back any further. Firm B, with much higher 
benefits from polluting, ends up producing QB emissions. If the tax has been set right, the sum 
of QA and QB will be Q0, or one half the original emission level of 2Q0. The tax has  accomplished 
its task of reducing emission levels.
Suppose we had instead used standards to achieve the emissions reduction, requiring each 
firm to produce ½Q0 rather than allowing firms to choose emissions based on their costs? Firm 
B is now producing more emissions than the standards would have required and would need 
to reduce further. We can see from the marginal benefit curve of Firm B how much it would 
lose by having to cut back its emissions further. Firm A’s emissions under the tax  system are 
lower than ½Q0, the standard allowance, so Firm A could increase its emissions. So a  common 
standard benefits Firm A and costs Firm B. But notice, Firm A gains less from the  ability to have 
higher emissions than Firm B loses in having to reduce its emissions. Therefore, on net, using a 
standard to achieve the desired emissions level gives us higher costs. The  emissions tax has not 
only reduced emissions as firms face the true price of those emissions, but it has also done so 
at minimum cost by encouraging firms with the lower benefits from polluting to do less of it 
 relative to other firms.
The control of carbon emissions is one area in which many economists have argued 
strongly for the use of a tax, though we have not yet seen one at the federal level. Carbon emis-
sions come from many different industries and consumers, with different marginal social 
benefit curves. Automobiles and airplanes create considerable emissions; power plants also 
emit considerable carbon. Moreover, each of these actors has multiple ways to reduce emis-
sions, from fuel choice to filters to technology choice. As we have seen, with big differences in 
marginal benefit curves taxes can achieve the same results as standards but at lower costs. The 
Economics in Practice box on the next page describes the carbon taxes that some firms have begun 
to impose on their own divisions to improve their environmental performance.
Measuring Social Costs 
To use taxes and subsidies, social costs from externalities must be 
estimated in financial terms. For the detergent plant polluting the nearby river to be properly 
taxed, the government must evaluate the costs done to residents downstream in money terms. 
This evaluation is difficult but not impossible. When legal remedies are pursued, judges are 
forced to make such estimates as they decide on compensation to be paid. Surveys of “willing-
ness to pay,” studies of property values in affected versus nonaffected areas, and  sometimes the 
market value of recreational activities can provide basic data.4
In the case of some externalities, social costs involve health problems or loss of life. Here, 
monetary costs are more difficult to estimate. Nevertheless, in many settings policy makers 
make judgments that implicitly set values on life and health. In making choices about traffic 
safety or occupational hazards, government agencies routinely put a dollar value on lives. As 
individuals, when we decide the risks to take, we too are implicitly valuing our health and lives.
Subsidizing External Benefits 
Sometimes activities or decisions generate external benefits 
instead of costs, as in the LoJack example. Investors who revitalize a downtown area—an old 
theater district in a big city, for example—provide benefits to many people, both in the city and 
in surrounding areas.
Activities that provide such external social benefits may be subsidized at the margin to give 
decision makers an incentive to consider them. Just as ignoring social costs can lead to ineffi-
cient decisions, so too can ignoring social benefits. Government subsidies for housing and other 
development, either directly through specific expenditure programs or indirectly through tax 
exemptions, have been justified on such grounds.
Tradeable emissions Permits: Selling or Auctioning Pollution Rights As we have 
seen, the right to impose environmental externalities is beneficial to the parties causing the ex-
ternal costs. In a sense, the right to dump in a river or to pollute the air or the ocean is a valuable 
resource as it permits a firm to produce its goods and avoid any costs of cleanup. Thinking of the 
4 Kenneth Arrow et al., “Report of the NOAA Panel on Contingent Valuations,” January 1993.
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 371 
privilege to dump in this way suggests an alternative mechanism for controlling pollution: sell-
ing or auctioning the pollution rights to the highest bidder. The Clean Air Act of 1990 takes this 
cap-and-trade approach to controlling the emissions from our nation’s power plants. Emissions 
related to acid rain from each plant are capped; that is, emissions are limited to a specified level. 
The lower the level specified, the more air quality will improve. The plant is issued a permit allow-
ing it to emit only at that level. This permit can be used or can be traded to another firm in what 
has developed into a large auction market. For a firm with low costs of abating pollution, it is 
often in the firm’s best interest to cut back below its permit levels and sell its unused permits to a 
firm with higher abatement costs. In this way, the given level of emissions chosen by the govern-
ment will be achieved at the lowest possible costs as a result of market trades. Environmentalists 
can also buy up permits and leave them unused, resulting in improvements in air quality beyond 
what the government mandated. These cap-and-trade programs are being used around the world 
in an attempt to reduce greenhouse gases responsible for global warming.
A simple example will help illustrate the potential gains from a cap-and-trade system, pick-
ing up from the two firm example we discussed previously but using a bit of arithmetic. Table 
16.1 shows the situation facing the two polluting firms. Assume that each firm emits 5 units of 
pollution per period and the government wants to reduce the total amount of pollution from the 
E co no m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
Imposing Internal Carbon Prices
As we have seen in this chapter, many economists favor 
the use of carbon prices to reflect the social cost of carbon 
emissions on the environment. Although we do not yet have 
a nationwide tax on carbon, we have seen a number of orga-
nizations using their own internal carbon “taxes” to change 
the behavior of their workers.
Walt Disney and Microsoft are two of the leaders among 
U.S. companies in using carbon taxes. As you likely know, 
Disney runs a number of parks and also has a sizeable fleet of 
cruise ships. The potential for carbon emissions from these 
businesses is large, especially from the cruise ships, which 
use a good deal of fuel. Beginning in 2009, Disney decided 
to try to make its own executives more sensitive to the way 
their decisions affected carbon emissions by imposing an 
internal carbon fee. For a range of corporate activities and 
investments, carbon emissions were calculated and then a 
division running an operation or planning an investment 
was charged by the center for the carbon their operations or 
investments produced. This fee increased the perceived costs 
to those decision makers of high-carbon-emission choices 
and made those emissions much more salient to these execu-
tives. Next time you visit a Disney park, pay attention to the 
trains. Many of them are run using vegetable oil recycled 
from the Disney kitchens.
Microsoft similarly uses internal carbon prices. For the 
Microsoft executives one major source of carbon emis-
sions is air travel. It is now Microsoft practice to charge 
divisions carbon fees for the trips taken by their exec-
utives. The clear hope is that these fees will incentiv-
ize executives to substitute video meetings for in-person 
meetings when possible.
Thinking PrACTiCAlly
1. Why might the social cost of capital be a good carbon 
fee to use from an economic efficiency perspective?
There are a number of universities that are also experi-
menting with the use of internal carbon fees to make both 
students and faculty more aware of the social costs of carbon. 
Yale University is one of these universities.
A key question in the use of these internal fees is what 
price to use. A number of agencies in the federal govern-
ment, including the Environmental Protection Agency, use 
the social cost of carbon as their fee. In 2015, at a 3 percent 
discount rate, that price was $39 per ton of carbon when they 
consider the costs of various policies.
372 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
current level of 10 to 4. To do this, the government caps each firm’s allowed pollution level at 2. 
Thus, each firm must pay to cut its pollution levels by 3 units. The process of reducing  pollution is 
sometimes called pollution abatement. The table shows the marginal cost of abatement for each firm 
and the total costs. (In our language, the marginal cost of abatement is just the marginal benefit 
to the firm of not abating). For Firm A, for example, the first unit of pollution reduced or abated 
costs only $5. So the marginal benefit from being allowed to pollute is $5. As the firm tries to abate 
more pollution, doing so becomes more costly; the marginal costs of reducing pollution rise. If 
Firm A wants to reduce its pollution levels from 5 units to 2, as the government requires, it must 
spend $21, $5 for the first unit, $7 for the second unit, and $9 for the third unit. Firm B finds reduc-
ing pollution to be more expensive. If it tries to reduce pollution by 3 units, it will have costs of $45. 
A cap-and-trade policy gives each of these firms two permits and allows them to trade permits if 
they so choose. What will the firms want to do?
Firm A can reduce its emissions from 2 units to 1 unit by spending $12 more on abate-
ment. It would then have a permit to sell to Firm B. How much would Firm B be willing to pay 
for this permit? At the moment, the firm is abating 3 units, and the marginal cost of that third 
unit is $23. This tells us that Firm B would be willing to pay up to $23 to buy a permit to allow 
it to continue polluting up to a level of 3. So there is room for a deal. Indeed, the permit price 
will be somewhere between the $12 demanded by Firm A and the $23 that Firm B is willing 
to spend. Because Firm A’s marginal costs of abatement are lower than Firm B’s, we expect 
Firm A to do more abatement and sell its extra permit to B. You should be able to see from 
the numbers that Firm A will not sell its last permit to B. To abate another unit, Firm A would 
have marginal costs of $17. To avoid abatement, however, Firm B would pay only $14. There is 
no room for a deal. Once the trade of one permit by A to B has occurred, there are still only 4 
units of pollution, but now Firm A is emitting 1 unit and Firm B is emitting 3 units. What are 
the total costs of this  pollution reduction? When both firms were reducing their emission lev-
els equally, the total costs were $21 for Firm A and $45 for Firm B, for a total of $66. Now costs 
are $33 for A and $22 for B, for a total of $55. (Of course, A will also be receiving a  payment 
for the permit.)
Europe implemented the world’s first mandatory trading scheme for carbon dioxide 
emissions in 2005 in response to its concern for global warming. Carbon dioxide emissions 
are a major source of global warming. The first phase of the plan, which was over at the end 
of 2007, involved around 12,000 factories and other facilities. The participating firms were 
oil refineries; power generation facilities; and glass, steel, ceramics, lime, paper, and chemical 
factories. These 12,000 plants represented 45 percent of total European Union (EU) emissions. 
The EU set an absolute cap on carbon dioxide emissions and then allocated allowances to gov-
ernments. The nations in turn distributed the allowances to the separate plants. In the second 
phase from 2008 through 2012, a number of large sectors were added, including agriculture 
and petrochemicals.
In both the United States and Europe, the allowances are given out to the selected plants free 
of charge even though the allowances will trade at a high price once they are distributed. Many 
are now questioning whether the government should sell them in the market or collect a fee from 
the firms. As it is, many of the firms that receive the allocations get a huge windfall. During the 
second phase in Europe, the governments are allowed to auction more than 10 percent of the 
allowances issued.
Table 16.1 Permit Trading
Firm A
Firm A
Firm A
Firm B
Firm B
Firm B
Reduction of pollu-
tion by Firm A (in 
units of pollution)
MC of reducing  
pollution for Firm A
TC of reducing  
pollution for Firm A
Reduction of pollu-
tion by Firm B (in 
units of pollution)
MC of reducing  
pollution for Firm B
TC of reducing  
pollution for Firm B
1
$ 5
$ 5
1
$ 8
$  8
2
  7
 12
2
 14
  22
3
  9
 21
3
 23
  45
4
 12
 33
4
 35
  80
5
 17
 50
5
 50
 130
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 373 
Another example of selling externality rights comes from Singapore, where the right to 
buy a car is auctioned each year. Despite high taxes and the need for permits to drive in down-
town areas, the roads in Singapore have become congested. The government decided to limit 
the number of new cars on the road because the external costs associated with them (conges-
tion and pollution) were becoming high. With these limits imposed, the decision was made to 
distribute car ownership rights to those who place the highest value on them. It seems likely 
that taxi drivers, trucking companies, bus lines, and traveling salespeople will buy the licenses; 
families who drive for convenience instead of taking public transportation will find the licenses 
too expensive. Congestion and pollution are not the only externalities that Singapore takes seri-
ously: In 2005 the fine for littering was as high as $1,000; for failing to flush a public toilet, more 
than $100; and for eating on a subway, $300.
Public (Social) Goods
Another source of market failure lies in public goods, often called social or collective goods. 
Public goods are defined by two closely related characteristics: They are nonrival in consump-
tion, and their benefits are nonexcludable. As we will see, these goods represent a market 
failure because they have characteristics that make it difficult for the private sector to produce 
them profitably. In an unregulated market economy with no government to see that they are 
produced, public goods would at best be produced in insufficient quantity and at worst not 
produced at all.
16.2 Learning Objective
Discuss the characteristics and 
provision of public goods.
public goods (social or 
 collective goods) goods that 
are nonrival in  consumption 
and their benefits are 
nonexcludable.
E co no m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
Emissions and Electricity Prices
The cap-and-trade program introduced in Europe and 
described in the text effectively resulted in a price for carbon 
in Europe, thus increasing the costs for carbon-producing 
firms. Electricity firms are among the largest of the carbon 
producers, and one might therefore expect increases in elec-
tricity prices to be a result. A recent study with Spanish data 
provides some evidence on this.
We can use the supply and demand analysis we have 
already learned to look at this question from a theoretical 
perspective. The carbon tax increases the marginal costs of 
electricity producers. Thus, the supply curve for the electric-
ity market is shifted upward to the left. With stable demand, 
we would expect prices to rise for electricity. The question is 
by how much. And, we already know the answer to that as 
well: It depends on the elasticity of supply and demand!
Fortunately, our researchers were able to use excellent 
data from Spain to estimate quite precisely the marginal costs 
for the electricity market. They also know a good deal about 
the structure of the Spanish market, so that the firm interac-
tions in this oligopoly market could also be modeled well. 
In this market, Fabra and Mar found almost a complete pass 
through: for a one Euro cost increase, electricity prices rose 
by 0.86 Euros. This is a high pass through and likely comes 
from two features of this market: quite inelastic aggregate 
demand for electricity and the fact that all firms faced similar 
cost increases, so that the firms had little incentive to com-
pete by altering markups.
Thinking PrACTiCAlly
1. What do you think would have happened to pass 
through if the largest of the electricity providers had 
been heavily invested in solar power, which does not 
produce carbon?
Based on Natalia Fabra and Mar Reguant, “Pass-Through of Emissions 
Costs in Electricity Markets,” American Economic Review, September, 2014, 
2872–2899.
374 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
The Characteristics of Public Goods
A good is nonrival in consumption when A’s consumption of it does not interfere with B’s con-
sumption of it. This means that the benefits of the goods are collective; they accrue to everyone. 
National defense, for instance, benefits us all. The fact that I am protected in no way detracts 
from the fact that you are protected; every citizen is protected just as much as every other citi-
zen. If the air is cleaned up, my breathing that air does not interfere with your breathing it, and 
(under ordinary circumstances) that air is not used up as more people breathe it. Private goods, 
in contrast, are rival in consumption. If I eat a hamburger, you cannot eat it too.
Goods can sometimes generate collective benefits and still be rival in consumption. This 
happens when crowding occurs. A park or a pool can accommodate many people at the same 
time, generating collective benefits for everyone. However, when too many people crowd in on 
a hot day, they begin to interfere with each other’s enjoyment.
Public goods are also nonexcludable. Once the good is produced, people cannot be excluded 
for any reason from enjoying its benefits. Once a national defense system is established, it protects 
everyone.
Before we go on, it is important to note that goods are either public or private by virtue of 
their characteristics (nonrival and nonexcludable) and not by virtue of whether they are pro-
duced by the public sector. If the government decided to make it a law that hamburgers were 
an entitlement (that is, all people could have all the hamburgers they wanted at government 
expense), that decision would not make hamburgers into public goods. It is an example of the 
government’s providing a private good free of charge to all. The government’s decision not to 
exercise the power to exclude doesn’t change the nature of a hamburger.
The real problem with public goods is that private producers may simply not have any 
incentive to produce them or to produce the right amount. For a private profit-making firm 
to produce a good and make a profit, it must be able to withhold that good from those who do 
not pay. McDonald’s can make money selling chicken sandwiches only because customers do 
not get the chicken sandwich unless they pay for it first. If payment were optional, McDonald’s 
would not be in business for long.
Consider an entrepreneur who decides to offer better police protection to the city of 
Metropolis. Careful (and we assume correct) market research reveals that the citizens of Metropolis 
want high-quality protection and are willing to pay for it. Not everyone is willing to pay the same 
amount. Some can afford more, others less. People also have different preferences and different 
feelings about risk. Our entrepreneur hires a sales force and begins to sell his service. Soon he 
encounters a problem. Because his company is private, payment is optional. He cannot force any-
one to pay. Payment for a hamburger is voluntary too, but a hamburger can be withheld for non-
payment. The good that our new firm is selling, however, is by nature a public good.
As a potential consumer of a public good, you face a dilemma. You want more police pro-
tection, and let us say that you are even willing to pay $50 a month for it. But nothing is contin-
gent on your payment. First, if the good is produced, the crime rate falls and all residents benefit. 
You get that benefit whether or not you pay for it. You get a free ride. That is why this dilemma 
is called the free-rider problem. Second, your payment is small relative to the amount that must 
be collected to provide the service. Thus, the amount of police protection actually produced 
will not be significantly affected by how much you contribute or whether you contribute at all. 
This is the drop-in-the-bucket problem. Consumers acting in their own self-interest have no 
incentive to contribute voluntarily to the production of public goods. Some will feel a moral 
responsibility or social pressure to contribute, and those people indeed may do so. Nevertheless, 
the economic incentive is missing, and most people do not find room in their budgets for many 
voluntary payments. The public goods problem can also be thought of as a large-number, 
 prisoners’ dilemma game theory problem. (For a full discussion, see Chapter 14.)
Public Provision of Public Goods
All societies, past and present, have had to face the problem of providing public goods. When 
members of society get together to form a government, they do so to provide themselves with 
goods and services that will not be provided if they act separately. Like any other good or ser-
vice, a body of laws (or system of justice) is produced with labor, capital, and other inputs. Law 
nonrival in consumption A 
characteristic of public goods: 
One person’s enjoyment of the 
benefits of a public good does 
not interfere with another’s 
consumption of it.
nonexcludable A character-
istic of public goods: Once a 
good is produced, no one can 
be excluded from enjoying its 
benefits.
free-rider problem A prob-
lem intrinsic to public goods: 
Because people can enjoy the 
benefits of public goods whether 
or not they pay for them, they 
are usually unwilling to pay  
for them.
drop-in-the-bucket problem  
A problem intrinsic to public 
goods: The good or service 
is usually so costly that its 
 provision generally does not 
depend on whether any single 
person pays.
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 375 
and the courts yield social benefits, and they must be set up and administered by some sort of 
collective, cooperative effort.
Notice that we are talking about public provision, not public production. Once the government 
decides what service it wants to provide, it often contracts with the private sector to produce 
the good. Much of the material for national defense is produced by private defense contractors. 
Highways, government offices, data processing services, and so on, are usually produced by 
private firms.
One of the immediate problems of public provision is that it frequently leads to public dis-
satisfaction. It is easy to be angry at government. Part, but certainly not all, of the reason for this 
dissatisfaction lies in the nature of the goods that government provides. Firms that produce or sell 
private goods post a price—we can choose to buy any quantity we want, or we can walk away with 
nothing. It makes no sense to get angry at a shoe store because no one can force you to shop there.
You cannot shop for collectively beneficial public goods. When it comes to national 
defense, the government must choose one and only one kind and quantity of (collective) output 
to produce. Because none of us can choose how much should be spent or what it should be 
spent on, most of us are dissatisfied. Even if the government does its job with reasonable effi-
ciency, at any given time, about half of us think we have too much national defense and about 
half of us think we have too little.
Optimal Provision of Public Goods
In the early 1950s, economist Paul Samuelson, building on the work of Richard Musgrave, dem-
onstrated that there exists an optimal, or a most efficient, level of output for every public good. The 
discussion of the Samuelson and Musgrave solution that follows leads us straight to the thorny 
problem of how societies, as opposed to individuals, make choices.
The Samuelson–Musgrave Theory 
An efficient economy produces what people want. 
Private producers, whether perfect competitors or monopolists, are constrained by the market 
demand for their products. If they cannot sell their products for more than it costs to produce 
them, they will be out of business. Because private goods permit exclusion, firms can withhold 
their products until households pay. Buying a product at a posted price reveals that it is “worth” 
at least that amount to you and to everyone who buys it.
Market demand for a private good is the sum of the quantities that each household decides 
to buy (as measured on the horizontal axis) at each price. The diagrams in Figure 16.4 review 
the derivation of a market demand curve. Assume that society consists of two people, A and B. 
At a price of $1, A demands 9 units of the private good and B demands 13. Market demand at a 
A
B
The market (A + B)
3
1
0
11
22
13
9
3
1
0
Units of output
Units of output
Units of output
9
2
3
1
0
Price per unit ($)
DA
DB
DA + B
▸
▴FiguRe 16.4 With Private goods, Consumers Decide What Quantity to Buy; 
Market Demand is the Sum of Those Quantities at each Price
At a price of $3, A buys 2 units and B buys 9 for a total of 11. At a price of $1, A buys 9 units and B buys 13 
for a total of 22. We all buy the quantity of each private good that we want. Market demand is the horizontal 
sum of all individual demand curves.
376 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
price of $1 is 22 units. If price were to rise to $3, A’s quantity demanded would drop to 2 units 
and B’s would drop to 9 units; market demand at a price of $3 is 2 + 9 = 11 units. The point is 
that the price mechanism forces people to reveal what they want, and it forces firms to produce 
only what people are willing to pay for, but it works this way only because exclusion is possible.
People’s preferences and demands for public goods are conceptually no different from 
their preferences and demands for private goods. You may want fire protection and be willing 
to pay for it in the same way you want to listen to music. To demonstrate that an efficient level 
of production exists, Samuelson assumes that we know people’s preferences. Figure 16.5 shows 
demand curves for buyers A and B. If the public good were available in the private market at a 
price of $6, A would buy X1 units. Put another way, A is willing to pay $6 per unit to obtain X1 
units of the public good. B is willing to pay only $3 per unit to obtain X1 units of the public good.
Remember, public goods are nonrival or nonexcludable—benefits accrue simultaneously to 
everyone. One and only one quantity can be produced, and that is the amount that everyone gets. 
When X1 units are produced, A gets X1 and B gets X1. When X2 units are produced, A gets X2 and 
B gets X2.
To arrive at market demand for public goods, we do not sum quantities. Instead, we add the 
amounts that individual households are willing to pay for each potential level of output. In Figure 16.5, A is 
A
B
The market (A + B)
Price per unit ($)
6
2
0
X1
X2
DA
Price per unit ($)
3
2
X1
X2
Price per unit ($)
9
4
X1
X2
0
Units of output
DB
DA + B
▸
▸FiguRe 16.5 With 
Public goods, There 
is Only One Level of 
Output and Consumers 
Are Willing to Pay 
Different Amounts for 
each Potential Level
A is willing to pay $6 per unit 
for X1 units of the public good. 
B is willing to pay only $3 for X1 
units. Society—in this case A and 
B—is willing to pay a total of $9 
for X1 units of the good. Because 
only one level of output can be 
chosen for a public good, we 
must add A’s contribution to B’s 
to determine market demand. 
This means adding demand 
curves vertically.
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 377 
willing to pay $6 per unit for X1 units and B is willing to pay $3 per unit for X1 units. Thus, if 
society consists only of A and B, society is willing to pay $9 per unit for X1 units of public good 
X. For X2 units of output, society is willing to pay a total of $4 per unit.
For private goods, market demand is the horizontal sum of individual demand curves; we 
add the different quantities that households consume (as measured on the horizontal axis). For 
public goods, market demand is the vertical sum of individual demand curves—we add the dif-
ferent amounts that households are willing to pay to obtain each level of output (as measured on 
the vertical axis).
Samuelson argued that once we know how much society is willing to pay for a public good, 
we need only compare that amount to the cost of its production. Figure 16.6 reproduces A’s 
and B’s demand curves and the total demand curve for the public good. As long as society (in 
this case, A and B) is willing to pay more than the marginal cost of production, the good should 
be produced. If A is willing to pay $6 per unit of public good and B is willing to pay $3 per unit, 
society is willing to pay $9.
Given the MC curve as drawn in Figure 16.6, the efficient level of output is X1 units. If at that 
level A is charged a fee of $6 per unit of X produced and B is charged a fee of $3 per unit of X, 
everyone should be happy. Resources are being drawn from the production of other goods and 
services only to the extent that people want the public good and are willing to pay for it. We have 
arrived at the optimal level of provision for public goods. At the optimal level, society’s total 
willingness to pay per unit is equal to the marginal cost of producing the good.
The Problems of Optimal Provision 
One major problem exists, however. To pro-
duce the optimal amount of each public good, the government must know something that 
it  cannot possibly know—everyone’s preferences. Because exclusion is impossible, nothing 
forces households to reveal their preferences. Furthermore, if we ask households directly 
about their willingness to pay, we run up against the same problem encountered by our pro-
tection-services salesperson mentioned previously. If your actual payment depends on your 
answer, you have an incentive to hide your true feelings. Knowing that you cannot be excluded 
from enjoying the benefits of the good and that your payment is not likely to have an appre-
ciable influence on the level of output finally produced, what incentive do you have to tell the 
truth—or to contribute?
How does society decide which public goods to provide? We assume that members of 
society want certain public goods. Private producers in the market cannot make a profit by 
producing these goods, and the government cannot obtain enough information to measure 
society’s demands accurately. No two societies have dealt with this dilemma in the same way. 
In some countries, dictators simply decide for the people. In other countries, representative 
political bodies speak for the people’s preferences. In still other countries, people vote directly. 
None of these solutions works perfectly.
optimal level of provision for 
public goods The level at 
which society’s total willingness 
to pay per unit is equal to the 
marginal cost of producing the 
good.
MC
X1
0
DA
DB
DA + B
PA + B = 9
PA = 6
PB = 3
Units of output
Price per unit ($)
▸
◂FiguRe 16.6 
 
Optimal Production of  
a Public good
Optimal production of a public 
good means producing as long as 
society’s total willingness to pay 
per unit (DA + B) is greater than 
the marginal cost of  producing 
the good.
378 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
Local Provision of Public Goods: Tiebout Hypothesis
In 1956, economist Charles Tiebout made this point: To the extent that local governments 
are responsible for providing public goods, an efficient market-choice mechanism may exist. 
Consider a set of towns that are identical except for police protection. Towns that choose to spend 
a great deal of money on police are likely to have a lower crime rate. A lower crime rate will attract 
households who are risk-averse and who are willing to pay higher taxes for a lower risk of being 
a crime victim. Those who are willing to bear greater risk or have fewer resources may choose to 
live in the low-tax/high-crime towns. Also, if some town is efficient at crime prevention, it will 
attract residents—given that each town has limited space, property values will be bid up in this 
town. The higher home price in this town is the “price” of the lower crime rate.
According to the Tiebout hypothesis, an efficient mix of public goods is produced when 
local prices (in the form of taxes or higher housing costs) come to reflect consumer preferences 
just as they do in the market for private goods. What is different in the Tiebout world is that 
 people exercise consumer sovereignty not by “buying” different combinations of goods in a 
market, but by “voting with their feet” (choosing among bundles of public goods and tax rates 
produced by different towns and participating in local government).
Common Resources
In the seventeenth century and previously in England, many villages had large common green 
areas in which villagers grazed their sheep. The areas were unowned, but in some sense held in 
common, and indeed these areas were called commons. Some of you may have learned about 
the enclosure movement in which many of these common areas were privatized and common 
grazing eliminated.
In most parts of the world, the open sea, beyond territorial limits around individual coun-
tries, is currently common area, available and open to all to fish, subject to a handful of interna-
tional fishing rules. Like the original grazing grounds, the sea has no owner. Economists refer 
to areas like the commons and fishing grounds as common resources. Common resources, like 
public goods, are nonexcludeable. One cannot keep someone from setting out a fishing line 
in open sea, nor from sending their sheep to graze in the common pasture. But, in contrast to 
public goods, the consumption of a common resource by one person has an effect on the avail-
ability of that resource to others. If I catch too many fish, the population will suffer and there 
will be none left for future generations. If I breed too many sheep, the grass will not regenerate 
and your sheep will starve.
Economists have worried for a long time about the management of commons. Of central 
concern is overuse. Suppose I own a lake stocked with fish. If I overfish it and there are not 
enough fish to reproduce, I suffer the consequences. My children and I lose the pleasure of fish-
ing and my lake loses value. To a large extent, I have the right incentives to protect my fish stock. 
If I overfish, I alone bear the consequences. But if we all own the lake in common, as a commu-
nity, then when I fish too much, we share the costs, while I get all the benefits of catching more 
fish. It should not surprise you to learn that, under these conditions, overuse is common.
When is overuse most problematic? In agrarian England, there is some evidence of over-
grazing of the commons, especially in larger villages. But not all commons are overused. In 
some communities, both grazing and fishing are controlled by custom and mutual forbear-
ance. If there is low productivity in extraction methods, overuse is also less of a problem. But 
where a common resource is shared by many, and technology is well developed, overuse is 
more likely. In modern times, overfishing of the sea is a problem that worries many policy 
makers.
As with externalities, there are several policy instruments we can use to control overuse 
of a commons. Standards are common; there are in most areas times of the year one cannot 
fish and limits on the size of fish that can be landed. Taxes are also common, typically levied 
by limiting and charging for fishing licenses. For some commons problems, a solution is 
found by privatizing the resource, as England did in the enclosure movement. If a common 
area is turned into a private resource, the owner will have incentives for using that resource 
efficiently.
Tiebout hypothesis An 
 efficient mix of public goods 
is produced when local land/
housing prices and taxes come 
to reflect consumer preferences 
just as they do in the market 
for private goods.
16.3 Learning Objective
Understand why the market 
undersupplies common 
resources.
common resource A resource 
that is nonexcludeable but rival 
in consumption.
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 379 
S u m m a R y 
16.1 ExTERnALITIES And EnvIROnMEnTAL 
ECOnOMICS p. 361
1. Often when we engage in transactions or make economic 
decisions, second or third parties suffer consequences that 
decision makers have no incentive to consider. These are 
called externalities. A classic example of an external cost is 
pollution.
2. When external costs are not considered in economic 
 decisions, we may engage in activities or produce products 
that are not “worth it.” When external benefits are not 
considered, we may fail to do things that are indeed “worth 
it.” The result is an inefficient allocation of resources.
3. A number of alternative mechanisms have been used to 
 control externalities: (1) private bargaining and negotitia-
tions, (2) environmental standards, (3) government-imposed 
taxes and subsidies, and (4) sale or auctioning of rights to 
impose externalities.
16.2 PuBLIC (SOCIAL) GOOdS p. 373
4. In an unfettered market, certain goods and services that 
 people want will not be produced in adequate amounts. 
These public goods have characteristics that make it  difficult 
or impossible for the private sector to produce them 
profitably.
5. Public goods are nonrival in consumption (their benefits fall col-
lectively on members of society or on groups of members), and 
their benefits are nonexcludable (it is generally impossible to ex-
clude people who have not paid from enjoying the benefits of 
public goods). An example of a public good is national defense.
6. One of the problems of public provision is that it leads to 
public dissatisfaction. We can choose any quantity of private 
goods that we want, or we can walk away without buying 
any. When it comes to public goods such as national de-
fense, the government must choose one and only one kind 
and quantity of (collective) output to produce.
7. Theoretically, there exists an optimal level of provision for each 
public good. At this level, society’s willingness to pay per 
unit equals the marginal cost of producing the good. To dis-
cover such a level, we would need to know the preferences 
of each individual citizen.
8. According to the Tiebout hypothesis, an efficient mix of public 
goods is produced when local land/housing prices and taxes 
come to reflect consumer preferences just as they do in the 
market for private goods.
16.3 COMMOn RESOuRCES p. 378
9. Common resources are nonexcludeable but rival in consump-
tion. A central problem with common resources is overuse.
R E v i E w  T E R m S  a n d  C o n C E P T S 
Coase theorem, p. 366
common resource, p. 378
drop-in-the-bucket problem, p. 374
externality, p. 361
free-rider problem, p. 374
injunction, p. 367
liability rules, p. 368
marginal social cost (MSC), p. 361
marginal social benefit of pollution, p. 364
nonexcludable, p. 374
nonrival in consumption, p. 374
optimal level of provision for public  
goods, p. 377
public goods (social or collective  
goods), p. 373
Tiebout hypothesis, p. 378
P R o b l E m S
Similar problems are available on MyEconLab .
16.1 ExTERnALITIES And EnvIROnMEnTAL 
ECOnOMICS
Learning Objective: Understand the market failure associated 
with externalities and the possible solutions to this set of issues.
 1.1 In October, 2015, a 5p carrier plastic bag charge went into 
effect in England for supermarkets and major retailers; sim-
ilar charges were already in effect in Wales, Scotland, and 
Ireland that had shown a steep drop in plastic bag usage.
a. Explain the rationale behind this “Pigovian” tax.
b. Using a graph explain its expected effects, given the 
prior observations in Wales and Ireland. What might 
these imply about the demand and supply elasticities for 
plastic bags?
c. What might be some unwelcome consequences as a result 
of this charge?
 1.2 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 371] The 
kingdom of Freedonia is divided into two countries: East 
Babalu and West Babalu. In an effort to reduce carbon di-
oxide emissions, the kingdom has enacted a carbon tax on 
all electricity providers. In East Babalu, a gloomy country 
with cloudy skies and rain every day of the year, 90 percent 
of households rely on electricity to power their homes. 
In West Babalu, a tropical paradise where the sun shines 
bright every day, only 10 percent of households get power 
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
380 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
from electricity providers, with the rest using solar panels 
to directly power their homes. Use supply and demand 
curves to show the effect of this carbon tax on the resi-
dents of both East Babalu and West Babalu, and explain 
which country’s residents will bear a greater burden of the 
tax. Assume that all electricity providers in the kingdom of 
Freedonia will face similar cost increases as a result of the 
carbon tax.
 1.3 In his 2009 paper entitled, The Economic Effects of Climate 
Change, Richard Tol wrote that “Climate change is the mother 
of all externalities: larger, more complex, and more uncertain than 
any other environmental problem”.
a. Using the concept of externalities, analyse the reason 
for that scope and complexity when climate change is 
concerned.
b. What are the developed world’s obligations to the 
 developing countries?  Should the developed  countries 
risk their own sense of well-being to meet these 
 obligations? Supportyour answer.
c. Search the web to find the major issues involved in 
 climate change.
 1.4 A paper factory dumps polluting chemicals into the 
Snake River. Thousands of citizens live along the river, 
and they bring suit, claiming damages. You are asked by 
the judge to testify at the trial as an impartial expert. The 
court is considering four possible solutions, and you are 
asked to comment on the potential efficiency and equity 
of each. Your testimony should be brief.
a. Deny the merits of the case and affirm the polluter’s right 
to dump. The parties will achieve the optimal solution 
without government.
b. Find in favor of the plaintiff. The polluters will be held 
 liable for damages and must fully compensate citizens for 
all past and future damages imposed.
c. Order an immediate end to the dumping, with no 
 damages awarded.
d. Refer the matter to the Environmental Protection Agency, 
which will impose a tax on the factory equal to the 
 marginal damage costs. Proceeds will not be paid to  
the damaged parties.
 1.5 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 371] 
Microsoft and Disney are just two of a growing number 
of organizations using internal carbon taxes in an at-
tempt to reduce carbon emissions, and the carbon prices 
being used to set the internal taxes vary widely. (In 2015, 
Microsoft priced carbon at $6-$7 per metric ton, and 
Disney used a price of $10 - $20 per metric ton.) Do some 
research to find three other companies or organizations 
that have also implemented an internal carbon tax. What 
are these companies or organizations doing with the 
revenue from these internal taxes? What price has each 
assigned to carbon, and how do the prices compare to 
the social cost of carbon as set by the Environmental 
Protection Agency?
 1.6 The Coase theorem implies that we never need to worry 
about regulating externalities because the private indi-
viduals involved will reach the efficient outcome through 
negotiations. Is that statement true or false? Justify your 
answer and use examples.
 1.7 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 363] The 
Economics in Practice suggests that economists often distin-
guish between short-run and long-run effects of policies 
or actions when adjusting to environmental disasters. 
Research a recent environmental disaster (such as the New 
England blizzard in early 2015, Hurricane Sandy in 2012, 
the 2015 earthquake in Nepal, or the BP oil spill in 2010.) 
Explain the major environmental impact the  disaster had 
on the affected area, how long you think it will take for the 
area to recover from the disaster, and why you believe the 
adjustment to the disaster will take either a relatively short 
or long time.
 1.8 The following diagram represents the profit-maximizing 
price and output for a firm in a perfectly competi-
tive  industry with no externalities. Use this diagram to 
 explain what will happen if the production of the product 
imposes external costs on society and these costs are not 
factored into production decisions.
 1.9 Refer to the previous question but assume that the 
 government has imposed a per-unit tax on this product 
that is exactly equal to the marginal damage costs. Use 
the diagram to show what will happen to production, 
output, and price.
 1.10 Two firms, Vesuvius and Etna, are each emitting 9 units of 
pollution, and the government wants to reduce the total 
level of pollution from the current level of 18 to 6. To do 
this, the government caps each firm’s allowed  pollution 
level at 3. Each firm must now pay to cut  pollution levels 
by 6 units. A cap-and-trade policy gives each of these 
firms three permits and allows them to trade permits if 
they choose. Based on the table below which represents 
the situation faced by these two firms, what will the firms 
want to do?
vesuvius
Etna
Pollution 
Reduction, 
units
MC of 
Reducing 
Pollution
TC of 
Reducing 
Pollution
Pollution 
Reduction, 
units
MC of 
Reducing 
Pollution
TC of 
Reducing 
Pollution
1
$ 5
$  5
1
$10
$ 10
2
  6
  11
2
 13
  23
3
  8
  19
3
 17
  40
4
 11
  30
4
 22
  62
5
 15
  45
5
 28
  90
6
 22
  67
6
 37
 127
7
 31
  98
7
 48
 175
8
 42
 140
8
 60
 235
9
 57
 197
9
 75
 310
q*
Price per unit ($)
0
P*
Units of output
MC
Chapter 16  Externalities, Public Goods, and Common Resources 381 
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
 1.11 Velma, a book editor for a local publishing company,  
and Daphne, an opera singer in a local opera company, 
share a townhouse in Miami. Velma enjoys reading and 
editing books at home, and Daphne enjoys rehearsing 
her arias at home. Daphne is willing to pay Velma $200 
per week if she will find another place to read and edit 
books. Velma offers Daphne $240 per week to find 
someplace else to rehearse. If Daphne has the right to 
rehearse in her home, explain why the townhouse will 
be free of aria rehearsals. If Velma has the right to read 
and edit books in her home, explain why the townhouse 
will still be free of aria rehearsals.
16.2 PuBLIC (SOCIAL) GOOdS
Learning Objective: Discuss the characteristics and provision 
of public goods.
 2.1 The existence of “public goods” is an example of potential 
market failure and suggests that a government or public 
sector can improve the outcome of completely free mar-
kets. Write a brief summary of the arguments for govern-
ment provision of public goods. (Make sure you consider 
the discussion of a prisoners’ dilemma in Chapter 14.) 
The following three arguments suggest that government 
may not improve the outcome as much as we might 
anticipate.
a. Public goods theory: Because public goods are collective, the 
government is constrained to pick a single level of output 
for all of us. National defense is an example. The govern-
ment must pick one level of defense expenditure. Some 
will think it is too much, some will think it is too little, and 
no one is happy.
b. Problems of social choice: It is impossible to choose collec-
tively in a rational way that satisfies voters/consumers of 
public goods.
c. Public choice and public officials: Once elected or appointed, 
public officials tend to act in accordance with their own 
preferences and not out of concern for the public.
Which of the three arguments do you find to be most 
persuasive?
 2.2 For the following goods state whether each falls in 
the category of private goods, mixed goods or public 
goods by employing the criteria of exclusivity and 
 rivalry in consumption. Explain your answers.
a. Cable TV
b. A piece of cheesecake
c. Grades in a class
d. Street lamps in Main Street, USA
 2.3 Explain why you agree or disagree with each of the 
 following statements:
a. The government should be involved in providing health 
care for all citizens because health care is a “public 
good.”
b. From the standpoint of economic efficiency, an unregu-
lated market economy tends to underproduce public 
goods.
 2.4 Bonnie and Clyde share a street on their way to their 
homes and wish to illuminate it. Bonnie’s demand 
for street lamps is given by P = $4, while Clyde’s 
 demand for streetlamps is given by P = $6. Street lamp 
 production involves marginal costs given by MC = 5Q, 
where Q = number of street lamps. 
a. What is the optimal level of street lamps installed?
b. How much should Bonnie and Clyde each be charged?
c. Graph (a)-(b) in a diagram.
d. How would your answers to the above change if MC = $3? 
If MC = $12?
10
25
DB
DE
50
50
Price ($)
Price ($)
Bert’s Demand
A
= 50 – 5 PA
Ernie’s Demand
Q E
Q B
A = 50 – 2 PA
0
0
▸
▴FiguRe 1 
 2.5 Government involvement in general scientific research 
has been justified on the grounds that advances in knowl-
edge are public goods—once produced, information can 
be shared at virtually no cost. A new production technol-
ogy in an industry could be made available to all firms, 
reducing costs of production, driving down price, and 
benefiting the public. The patent system, however, allows 
private producers of “new knowledge” to exclude others 
from enjoying the benefits of that knowledge. Inventors 
would have little incentive to produce new knowledge if 
there was no possibility of profiting from their inventions. 
If one company holds exclusive rights to an advanced 
production process, it produces at lower cost but can use 
382 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
the exclusion to acquire monopoly power and charge the 
monopoly price.
a. On balance, is the patent system a good or bad thing? 
Explain.
b. Is government involvement in scientific research a good 
idea? Discuss.
 2.6 The recent economic growth resulting from govern-
ment policies of newly industrializing nations such as 
India and China has increased environmental strains 
on global air and water systems. The negative exter-
nalities associated with this economic growth demon-
strate that the best economic system is one in which 
all economic decisions are made by individual house-
holds and firms without any government involvement. 
Comment briefly.
16.3 COMMOn RESOuRCES
Learning Objective: Understand why the market undersupplies 
common resources.
 3.1 Iceland faced a problem of overfishing and witnessed 
their cod and herring populations nearly disappearing 
in the 1960s and 1970s. The overuse of a common re-
source like fish is often referred to as “The Tragedy of the 
Commons”. 
a. Explain how fisheries exemplify the overuse of a common 
resource.
b. In 1983, after a failed system of limiting the number 
of boats that could fish in given days, the government 
addressed over-fishing by introducing a system of 
“Individual Tradable Quotas (Permits)”, set by a  scientific 
committee and allocated to each vessel. As a result, 
30 years later, Iceland managed to have a healthy, growing 
stock of fish. Explain how this system is expected to lead 
to such an efficient outcome.
383 
17 
In previous chapters, we as-
sumed that consumers and 
firms made choices based on 
perfect information about the 
qualities of the goods they were 
choosing among. Under these 
circumstances, we could inter-
pret their choices as revealing 
to us their true preferences. 
Similarly, when firms choose 
how many workers to hire or 
how much capital to use, we 
 assumed that they know the 
productivity of those work-
ers or that capital. Of course, 
in 
many 
settings, 
perfect 
 information seems to be a rea-
sonable assumption to make. 
Every day you may choose 
whether to have cereal or eggs 
for breakfast. Every evening 
you may decide what to have 
for  dinner and whether to go 
to the movies or stay home and 
study. Even for these choices, 
a little uncertainty can creep 
in; perhaps a new cereal is on 
the  market or a new movie 
has been  released. But assum-
ing that these choices are made 
with perfect  information does 
not seem too far a stretch.
In some markets, however, consumers and firms clearly make decisions with quite limited 
information. When you decide to insure your car against theft, you don’t know whether the 
car will be stolen. When you decide to buy a used car, it is not easy to figure out how good that 
car really is. If you are choosing between a sales job that pays a flat salary and one that pays a 
commission for every sale you make, you have to predict how good your sales skills will be to 
 determine which is the better offer. In many markets, including some important markets, con-
sumers as well as firms make decisions while having only some of the information they need. In 
this chapter, we will explore the economics of these  markets. As we go through this chapter, you 
will see how both the recent healthcare reform  discussion and the 2008–2009 banking crisis can 
be understood using economic tools.
Uncertainty and 
Asymmetric 
Information
Chapter Outline 
and learning 
ObjeCtives 
17.1  Decision 
Making Under 
Uncertainty: The 
Tools p. 384
Define the concepts of ex-
pected value and expected 
utility and how these mea-
sures relate to risk attitudes.
17.2  Asymmetric 
Information p. 388
Describe the characteristics, 
implications, and solutions 
for asymmetric situations.
17.3  Incentives p. 393
Discuss the benefits of 
 effective incentive design.
384 Part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
Decision Making Under Uncertainty:  
The Tools
In Chapter 6, we laid out the fundamental principles of consumer choice assuming perfect 
information. To adapt this model  to cases in which there is uncertainty, we need to develop a 
few more tools.
Expected Value
Suppose I offer you the following deal: You flip a coin 100 times. Every time the coin is a head, 
you pay me $1. Whenever the coin lands on tails, I pay you a dollar. We call the amount that one 
player—in this case, me—receives in each of the situations the payoff. Here my payoff is +$1 for 
heads and -$1 for tails. In the case of a coin toss, the probability of heads is ½, as is the probabil-
ity of tails. This tells us that the financial value of this deal to me, or its expected value, is $0. Half 
the time I win a dollar, and half the time I lose a dollar. Formally, we define the expected value  of 
an uncertain situation or deal as the sum of the payoffs associated with each possible outcome 
multiplied by the probability that outcome will occur. Again, in the case of a coin toss with the 
payoffs described, the expected value (EV) is
EV = 1/2($1) + 1/2(-$1) = 0
The coin toss is an easy example, in part because there are only two outcomes. But the 
definition of expected value holds for any deal in which I can describe both the payoffs and 
the probabilities of all possible outcomes. If I play a game in which I receive $1 every time I roll a 
die and end up with an even number and I pay $1 every time the die comes up odd, this deal also 
has an expected value of $0. Half the time (3 of 6 possible outcomes) I receive $1, and half the 
time (3 of 6 possible outcomes) I pay $1.
The two games just described are known as fair games or fair bets. A fair game has an 
expected value of $0. The expected financial gains from playing a fair game are equal to the 
financial costs of that game. In the two fair games we described, the stakes are quite low. 
Suppose instead of $1 payoffs, we made the payoffs $1,000 for heads and -$1,000 for tails. 
As you can see, the expected value of that deal is $0 just as it was in the $1 game. But we have 
learned in watching people’s behavior that although some people might be willing to play a fair 
game with $1 payoffs, few people will play $1,000-payoff fair games. What is it about people 
that makes them change their minds about taking a fair bet when the stakes get high? We will 
explore this question next using some of the tools already covered in Chapter 6.
Expected Utility
Recall from Chapter 6 that consumers make choices to maximize utility. The idea of maximiz-
ing utility will also help us understand the way in which those consumers make choices in risky 
situations.
Chapter 6 introduced you to the idea of diminishing marginal utility—the more of any 
one good consumed in a period, the less incremental satisfaction (utility) will be generated 
by each additional (marginal) unit of that good. Review Figure 6.3 on p. 153 and notice the 
form the utility curve takes when we have diminishing marginal utility for a good. The curve 
flattens as we increase units of the good consumed. Now think about what happens to your 
utility level when we increase not the number of units of a particular good, but your overall 
income. Figure 17.1 graphs the total utility of a typical consumer, Jacob, as a function of his 
income. On the y-axis, we have assigned units of total utility, while on the x-axis we have 
annual income. The shape of the utility curve tells us that Jacob has diminishing marginal 
utility from income. The first $20,000 of income is important to Jacob, moving him from 
a total utility level of 0 to 10; this first $20,000 might allow him to buy food and shelter, for 
example. Moving from $20,000 to $40,000 brings an increase in well-being from 10 to 15. 
Notice that the second $20,000 adds 5 to the total utility level, whereas the first $20,000 
17.1 Learning Objective
Define the concepts of 
expected value and expected 
utility and how these measures 
relate to risk attitudes.
payoff The amount that 
comes from a possible 
 outcome or result.
expected value The sum of 
the payoffs associated with 
each possible outcome of 
a situation weighted by its 
 probability of occurring.
fair game or fair bet A game 
whose expected value is zero.
diminishing marginal utility  
The more of any one good 
 consumed in a given period, 
the less incremental satisfac-
tion is generated by consuming 
a marginal or incremental unit 
of the same good.
ChaPter 17  Uncertainty and Asymmetric Information 385 
adds 10. And the pattern continues as we add $20,000 increments to income. Each dollar 
increases total utility, but at a decreasing rate. The result is a curve as shown in Figure 17.1 
that flattens as we move from left to right, with smaller gains in total utility from equal gains 
in income.
You should see that the assumption of diminishing marginal utility of income reflects the 
diminishing marginal utility of goods that we talked about in Chapter 6. Income counts for less 
the more we have because the value of what we can buy with that money on the margin falls as 
we buy more.
As you think about Figure 17.1, remember that we are describing the relationship between 
utility and income for a given individual. The figure does not tell us that rich people get less util-
ity from an incremental dollar than do poor people. Indeed, it might be argued that one rea-
son some rich people work so hard to make money is that they get a great deal of utility from 
increases in income relative to the average person. But rich or poor, Figure 17.1 tells us that as 
your income increases, the marginal utility of another dollar falls.
How does Figure 17.1 help us explain people’s unwillingness to play fair games with larger 
stakes? Suppose Jacob, the individual whose preferences are shown in Figure 17.1, is currently 
earning $40,000. We see that $40,000 corresponds to a total utility level of 15. Now a firm offers 
Jacob a different type of salary structure. Rather than earning $40,000 for sure, at the end of the 
year, a manager will toss a coin. If it is heads, Jacob will earn $60,000; but if the coin turns up 
tails, his earnings will fall to $20,000. This is a high stakes game of the sort described previously. 
Notice that the expected value of the two salaries is the same. With one, Jacob earns $40,000 
with certainty. With the second, he earns $20,000 half the time and $60,000 half the time, for an 
expected value of
EV = 1/2 ($20,000) + 1/2 ($60,000) = $40,000
From an expected value perspective, the two salary offers are identical. So if we simply 
looked at the expected values, we might expect Jacob to be indifferent between the two wage 
offers. But if you put yourself in Jacob’s shoes, probably you would not find the coin-tossing 
salary to be as attractive as the fixed $40,000 wage. If we think back to the model introduced 
in Chapter 6, we can see why. Consumers make choices not to maximize income per se but to 
maximize their utility levels. Figure 17.1 tells us that although utility increases with income, the 
relationship is not linear. So to decide what Jacob will do, we need to look at his utility under the 
two contracts.
What can we say about Jacob’s utility under the two salary contracts? With a fixed $40,000 
salary, total utility is at a level of 15, as we saw previously. If his income falls to $20,000, that 
utility level falls from 15 to 10, a substantial drop. With a possible earnings level of $60,000, 
the total utility level goes up; but notice that it only increases from 15 to 18. The drop in 
income causes a bigger loss in utility than comes from a gain in income. Of course, this results 
from the diminishing marginal utility of income. In fact, we can define expected utility as the 
sum of the utilities coming from all possible outcomes of a deal, weighted by the probability of 
each occurring. You can see that the expected utility is like the expected value, but the payoffs 
expected utility The sum of 
the utilities coming from all 
possible outcomes of a deal, 
weighted by the probability of 
each occurring.
10
0
Income
Income
$20,000 $40,000 $60,000 $80,000
15
18
19
Utility
◂
◂Figure 17.1  The 
relationship Between 
utility and income
The figure shows the way in 
which utility increases with 
income for a hypothetical 
 person, Jacob. Notice that  utility 
increases with income but at a 
decreasing rate: the curve gets 
flatter as income increases. 
This curve shows diminishing 
 marginal utility of income.
386 Part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
are in utility terms rather than in dollars. In the coin-toss salary offer, if you look again at 
Figure 17.1, the expected utility (EU) is
EU = 1/2 U($20,000) + 1/ 2 U(60,000), which reduces to
EU = 1/2 (10) + 1/2 (18) = 14
Because Jacob’s utility from a fixed salary of $40,000 is 15, he will not take the coin-toss sal-
ary alternative.
Of course, in practice, workers are not paid wages based on the toss of a coin. Nevertheless, 
many wage contracts contain some uncertainty. Many of you have probably had jobs where 
your wages were uncertain in ways you could not control. Understanding the difference 
between expected value maximization and expected utility maximization helps us understand 
these job contracts.
In uncertain situations, consumers make choices to maximize their expected utility. 
Looking at Figure 17.1, you should now see why people may take small fair bets but will avoid 
fair games with high stakes. For small games, both alternatives lie within a small region of the 
utility curve. The utility of gaining one more dollar or losing it is almost identical. When we 
compare outcomes at different points on the utility curve, the differences in marginal utility 
become more pronounced. This makes large fair bets quite unattractive. The prospect of losing 
and moving down the marginal utility (MU) curve is much more troublesome to you than the 
prospect of moving up the curve is pleasurable.
Attitudes Toward Risk
We have now seen that diminishing marginal utility of income means that the typical individual 
will not play a large stakes fair game. Individuals, like Jacob, who prefer a certain payoff to an 
uncertain payoff with an equal expected value are called risk-averse. Risk aversion thus comes 
from the assumption of diminishing marginal utility of income and can be seen in the shape 
of the utility curve. You are unwilling to take a risk because the costs of losing in terms of your 
well-being or utility exceed the gains of possibly winning. People who are willing to take a fair 
bet, one that has an expected value of zero, are known as risk-neutral. For these individuals, 
the  marginal utility of income is constant so that the relationship between total utility and 
income in a graph like Figure 17.1, for example, would be a straight, upward-sloping line. Again, 
we have seen that some people will be risk-neutral when the stakes are low. Finally, some people, 
in some circumstances, may actually prefer uncertain games to certain outcomes. Individuals 
who pay to play a game with an expected value of zero or less are known as risk-loving. Since 
most people are risk-averse in most situations, we will concentrate on this case.
The fact that people are, in general, risk-averse is seen in many markets. Most people who 
own houses buy fire insurance even when not required to do so. In general, a fire insurance pol-
icy costs a homeowner more than it is worth in terms of expected value; this is how insurance 
companies make money. People pay for this insurance because they are risk-averse: The possible 
loss of their home is important relative to the value of the premiums they have to pay to protect 
it. When people invest in a risky business, there has to be some chance that they will “make 
it big” to induce them to put up their money. The riskier the business in the sense that it may 
fail, the bigger the upside potential needs to be. This too is an indication of risk aversion. The 
presence of risk and uncertainty do not by themselves pose a problem for the workings of the 
market. The risk that your house might burn down does not prevent you from buying a house; 
it simply encourages you, if you are risk-averse, to buy insurance. In fact, many markets are 
designed to allow people to trade risk. Individuals who are risk-averse seek out other individuals 
(or more commonly firms) who are willing to take on those risks for a price.
What is the maximum price a risk-averse person will pay to avoid taking a risk? Figure 17.2 
gives us another look at the same individual, Jacob, we examined in Figure 17.1. Suppose Jacob 
is currently earning $40,000 but faces a 50 percent chance of suffering an unpreventable disabil-
ity that will reduce his income level to $0. Thus, the expected value of Jacob’s income is
EV = 1/2($40,000) + 1/2($0) = $20,000
risk-averse Refers to a 
 person’s preference of a certain 
payoff over an uncertain one 
with the same expected value.
risk-neutral Refers to a 
 person’s willingness to take a 
bet with an expected value of 
zero.
risk-loving Refers to a per-
son’s willingness to take bets 
with negative expected values.
ChaPter 17  Uncertainty and Asymmetric Information 387 
Suppose further that there are many individuals just like Jacob. On average, in any year, 
half would become disabled and half would not. If an insurance company offered policies to 
all of them, offering to replace their $40,000 salaries should they become disabled, on average, 
this policy would cost the company $20,000 per person. In other words, the expected value 
tells us what, on average, it would cost a firm that pooled large numbers of identical people 
to offer them insurance against an income loss of this size. If the individuals are willing to pay 
the insurance company more than this expected value, there is a potential deal to be made. In 
fact, looking at Figure 17.2 shows us that the deal offered by the insurance company to cover 
earnings losses in the case of a disability is worth more than $20,000 to a risk-averse indi-
vidual like Jacob. Uninsured, Jacob faces a 50 percent chance of earning $0 and a 50 percent 
chance of earning $40,000. Looking at the graph, we see that the expected utility of Jacob in 
his uninsured state is
EU = 1/2 U($0) + 1/2 U($40,000)
EU = 1/2(0) + 1/2(15) = 7.5
But a utility level of 7.5 corresponds, as we look at Figure 17.2, to a certain income level of 
x, which is below the $20,000 level. In other words, Jacob would be indifferent between a certain 
income of $x and remaining uninsured. But because $x is less than $20,000, we know that Jacob 
is willing to pay a premium to avoid this disability risk. So there is room for a deal between the 
insurance company and risk-averse individuals. Because insurance companies can pool risks 
across many different people, they will be risk-neutral, willing to take on the risks of individuals 
for a price. In this example, the distance between $20,000, the expected value of the risk, and $x 
tells us the bargaining range between Jacob and the insurers.
You may now be wondering how economists explain gambling. Every day people through-
out the United States buy lottery tickets even though they know that lotteries are not a fair 
bet. The Powerball lottery in Connecticut is one example. The winning number is  generated 
by choosing 5 numbers out of a pool of 59, then choosing another number from a pool of 
35. The probability of getting all 6 numbers correct and winning the lottery’s top prize is 1 in 
175  million. The top prize in the lottery varies but is typically in the $10 million to $150  million 
range. The prize is taxable, and winning the top prize would push a winner into the top tax 
bracket with a tax rate of almost 40 percent. When the prize level is high, many people play the 
lottery and there is a risk of multiple winners, with prize sharing. Thus, in all cases, the expected 
value of the typical lottery is highly negative. Playing the slots at a casino also has a negative 
expected value, as do all professional games of chance. If this were not true, casinos would go 
out of business and the state would not make money from its lottery. Nevertheless, individuals 
buy lottery tickets and gamble in a range of forms. One explanation for this risk-taking behav-
ior may, of course, be that some people find gambling fun and gamble not just in the hopes 
of winning but for the experience. For other people, gambling may be an addiction. Trying to 
understand more fully why people gamble while they seem to be risk-averse in most other ways 
remains an interesting research area in economics.
10
7.5
0
Income
$20,000
$x
$40,000
$60,000
15
18
Total utility
Utility
◂
◂Figure 17.2  risk 
Aversion and insurance 
Markets
With a 50 percent chance of 
earning $40,000 and a 50 
percent chance of becoming 
disabled and earning $0, Jacob 
has an EV of income of $20,000. 
But his expected utility is halfway 
between the utility of $40,000 
(15) and the utility of 0 (0), or 
7.5. $x is the amount of certain 
earnings Jacob would accept to 
avoid a 50 percent chance of 
earning $0.
388 Part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
Asymmetric Information
In the discussion so far, we have described the way people behave in situations in which 
 everyone involved in the deal is equally uncertain. Again, the coin toss is a classic case. When 
you offer me a coin toss game, neither you nor I know how the coin will fall. Unless you have 
somehow fixed the coin, it is an unknowable game of chance. In these situations, we have seen 
how to use the idea of expected utility to understand choices and we have seen how markets 
arise to enable risk trading. In other situations, though, the playing field may be less even, with 
one party to the transaction having more information relevant to the transaction than the other 
party. Economists refer to these circumstances as ones of asymmetric information. Asymmetric 
information creates possibilities of market failure by making it harder for individuals to make 
deals that would otherwise be attractive.
We are surrounded by situations with asymmetric information. A homeowner has better 
information than does his or her insurance company about how careful his or her family is, how 
often family members use candles, and whether anyone smokes. All of these factors are  important 
to an insurance company trying to set an insurance price. When you applied to  college, you likely 
knew more about your work ethic than did the colleges to which you applied.
In this section, we will explore several classic types of asymmetric situations. We will look 
at the nature of the market failure that arises when we have asymmetric information, and we will 
consider some of the mechanisms that individuals and markets use to deal with these problems.
Adverse Selection
A common saying in the car market is that once you drive a new car off the lot, it loses a sub-
stantial part of its original value. Why might this be true? Physical depreciation is likely small 
after only a few miles, for example. The answer can be found in the theory of adverse selection, 
a theory whose development was cited by the Nobel Committee in its award to George Akerlof 
in 2001. Adverse selection is a category of asymmetric information problems. In adverse selec-
tion, the quality of what is being offered in a transaction matters and is not easily demonstrated. 
For example, consumers might be willing to pay for high-quality used cars. But it is hard to tell 
which cars are good and which cars are not, and sellers will not, in general, have an incentive 
to be completely truthful. Insurance companies might be willing to offer inexpensive health 
insurance to people who take good care of themselves. But it is not easy to figure out who those 
people are, and insurance buyers are not likely to want to tell the company about their bad 
habits. As we will see, under these conditions, high-quality products and high-quality consum-
ers are often squeezed out of markets, giving rise to the term adverse selection. In the Economics in 
Practice on page 390, we will explore some issues in adverse selection and genetic testing. But first 
we will explore the used car market, the setting Akerlof first wrote about.
Adverse Selection and Lemons 
Suppose you were in the market for a slightly used car 
of a particular make, perhaps from 2009. Having read a number of automotive magazines, you 
learned that half of these cars are lemons (bad cars) and half are peaches (good cars). Given your 
own tastes, a peach of this model year is worth $12,000 to you, whereas a lemon is worth only 
$3,000. What would you pay if you were unable to tell a peach from a lemon?
One possible solution to this problem might involve thinking back to the lesson on expected 
value. The data we described suggest that the expected value of this type of used car is $7,500, 
which we calculate as 1>2($12,000) + 1>2($3,000). From expected utility theory, you might  conclude 
that as a risk averse person you would pay somewhat less than this—let’s say $7,000.
The problem with this calculation, however, is that you have forgotten that you will be try-
ing to buy this car from a rational, utility-maximizing car seller. Under these circumstances, it 
will not be equally likely that the car offered will be a peach or a lemon. So the original calcula-
tion you made of the expected values will not be right. Let us see how a potential seller of a used 
car sees the situation.
Suppose you offer current owners of a random 2009 car the $7,000 that we calculated. 
Which owners will want to sell? Owners of cars likely know whether they have peaches or 
lemons. After all, they have been driving these cars for a while. The game we are playing here is 
17.2 Learning Objective
Describe the characteristics, 
implications, and solutions for 
asymmetric situations.
asymmetric information One 
of the parties to a transaction 
has information relevant to 
the transaction that the other 
party does not have.
adverse selection A situ-
ation in which asymmetric 
information results in high-
quality goods or high-quality 
 consumers being squeezed 
out of transactions because 
they cannot demonstrate the 
quality of the product they are 
offering for sale.
