Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 423 
The Basics of Taxation
To begin our analysis of the U.S. tax system, we need to clarify some terms. There are many 
kinds of taxes, and tax analysts use a specific language to describe them.
Taxes: Basic Concepts
Every tax has two parts: a base and a rate structure. The tax base is the measure or value upon 
which the tax is levied. In the United States, taxes are levied on a variety of bases, including 
income, sales, property, and corporate profits. The tax rate structure determines the portion of 
the tax base that must be paid in taxes. A tax rate of 25 percent on income, for example, means 
that you pay a tax equal to 25 percent of your income.
Taxes on Stocks versus Taxes on Flows 
Tax bases may be either stock measures or flow 
measures. The local property tax is a tax on the value of residential, commercial, or industrial 
property. A homeowner, for instance, is taxed on the current assessed value of his or her home. 
Current value is a stock variable—that is, it is measured or estimated at a point in time.
Other taxes are levied on flows. Income is a flow. Most people are paid on a monthly basis, 
and they have taxes taken out every month. Retail sales take place continuously, and a retail sales 
tax takes a portion of that flow. Figure 19.1 diagrams in simple form the important  continuous 
payment flows between households and firms and the points at which the government levies six 
different taxes.
Table 19.1 presents for selected years between 1960 and 2014 the distribution of total 
 federal government receipts among five categories. Over this long period, the share of individ-
ual income taxes and corporate income taxes have fluctuated modestly. Social insurance payroll 
taxes have changed more dramatically over this period, more than doubling as a share of total 
receipts, to become the second most important part of federal receipts.
19.1 Learning Objective
Define the fundamentals of 
taxation.
tax base The measure or 
value upon which a tax is 
levied.
tax rate structure The per-
centage of a tax base that must 
be paid in taxes—25 percent of 
income, for example.
Firms
Households
Factor
markets
Product
markets
%
QP
UW
O
RV
KQ
P
5C
NG
U
9
C
I
G
U
&K
XK
FG
PF
U
+P
EQ
O
G
2T
QƂ
VU

4G
PV
U
4G
PV
U
9
C
I
G
U
1
2
3
4
5
6
2GTUQPCNKPEQOGVCZ
-G[
EQWPVGTENQEMYKUG
1
%QPUWORVKQPVCZ
RGTUQPCN
2
4GVCKNUCNGUVCZ
3
2C[TQNNVCZ
4
2TQƂVU
PGVKPEQOGVCZ
5
9CIGVCZ
6
▴
▴Figure 19.1 Taxes on economic “Flows”
Most taxes are levied on measurable economic flows. For example, a profits, or net income, tax is levied on 
the annual profits earned by corporations.
424 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
Proportional, Progressive, and regressive Taxes 
A tax whose burden is the same 
proportion of income for all households is a proportional tax. A tax of 20 percent on all forms 
of income, with no deductions or exclusions, is a proportional tax.
A tax that exacts a higher percentage of income from higher-income households than 
from lower-income households is a progressive tax. Because its rate structure increases with 
income, the U.S. individual income tax is a progressive tax. In 2011 the average federal income 
tax rate paid by a household in the bottom quintile of the income distribution in the United 
States was 1.9 percent; the average rate for a household in the top quintile was 23.4 percent. 
The current tax system allows households to deduct a number of items before calculating 
their taxes (mortgage interest, for example) and treats some categories of income differently 
than others, so that tax rates at the higher end in particular may differ quite a bit from this 
average. It is thus not impossible for someone at the top end of income to actually pay taxes 
at a lower rate than someone earning less, but the average rates do show that income taxes are 
progressive.
A tax that exacts a lower percentage of income from higher-income families than from 
lower-income families is a regressive tax. Excise taxes (taxes on specific commodities such as 
gasoline and telephone calls) are regressive. The retail sales tax is also a regressive tax. Suppose 
the retail sales tax in your state is 5 percent. You might assume that it is a proportional tax 
because everyone pays 5 percent. But all people do not spend the same fraction of their income 
on taxable goods and services. In fact, higher-income households save a larger fraction of their 
incomes. Even though they may pay more taxes in dollars than lower-income families, they end 
up paying a smaller proportion of their incomes in sales tax.
Marginal versus Average Tax rates 
Each year income earners must file a tax return 
with the Internal Revenue Service on or before April 15. On that form, you first figure out 
the total tax you are responsible for paying. Next, you determine how much was withheld 
from your income and sent to the IRS by your employer. If too much was withheld, you get 
a refund; if not enough was withheld, you have to write a check to the government for the 
difference.
In figuring out the total amount of tax you must pay, you first add up all your income. You 
are then allowed to subtract certain items from it. Among the things that virtually all taxpayers 
can subtract are the personal exemption and the standard deduction. After everything is subtracted, 
you are left with taxable income. Taxable income is then subject to a set of rates that rise with 
income.
In thinking about tax rates commentators often refer to an individual’s average tax rate. An 
average tax rate is simply the total tax paid divided by total income. With an income of $100,000 
and a tax paid of $20,000, your average tax rate would be 20 percent. Also important to consider 
is the marginal tax rate, that is, how much of the next dollar earned goes to the government, 
given one’s current income level. With a progressive income tax like the one we have in the 
United States, marginal tax rates and average tax rates are not equal.
proportional tax A tax whose 
burden is the same proportion 
of income for all households.
progressive tax A tax whose 
burden, expressed as a percent-
age of income, increases as 
income increases.
regressive tax A tax whose 
burden, expressed as a percent-
age of income, falls as income 
increases.
average tax rate Total 
amount of tax paid divided by 
total income.
marginal tax rate The tax 
rate paid on the next dollar 
earned.
Table 19.1 Federal Government Receipts 1960–2014 (billions of dollars)
Individual
Corporate
Social Insurance
Income 
Tax
%
Income 
Tax
%
Payroll 
Tax
%
Ex cise 
Taxes
%
Other 
Receipts
 
%
Total
1960
   41.8
43.4
 21.4
22.2
   16.0
16.6
 13.1
13.6
  4.0
0.4
   93.6
1970
   88.9
48.0
 30.6
16.5
   45.5
24.6
 18.1
 9.8
  2.0
1.1
  185.1
1980
  250.0
46.9
 70.3
13.2
  163.6
30.7
 33.7
 6.3
 15.4
2.9
  533.0
1990
  470.1
43.3
118.1
10.9
  402.0
37.0
 50.9
 4.7
 44.6
4.1
1,085.7
2000
  995.6
48.3
219.4
10.6
  698.6
33.9
 87.3
 4.2
 62.3
3.0
2,063.2
2010
  893.8
37.4
298.7
12.5
  970.9
40.6
 96.8
 4.0
131.5
5.5
2,391.7
2014
1,374.2
41.6
497.3
15.1
1,149.4
34.8
134.1
 4.1
145.8
4.4
3,300.8
Source: u.s. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015. Percentages may not add to 100 due to rounding.
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 425 
Take a look at the Economics in Practice box above. It shows the income taxes that would be 
paid by two hypothetical single people earning $100,000 and $200,000, respectively. The discus-
sion uses the actual 2014 U.S. tax rates. These calculations show that average and marginal tax 
rates are not the same in a progressive tax system. Which tax rate should you pay attention to? 
When talking about taxes, many people focus on average rates, the percentage of one’s income 
that goes to the government. But for many decisions, the marginal rate is more relevant. If you 
are thinking of working more hours, you will be paying the marginal (higher) rate on the incre-
mental income earned; so that is the rate you should look at in thinking about whether to work. 
In thinking about whether to donate money (which has the effect of lowering adjusted income), 
the marginal rate is again the relevant one.
How Much Does a Deduction Save You in Taxes? 
As you saw in the Economics in 
Practice, you were allowed to subtract $6,200 from your income as a single person before calcu-
lating taxes. However, you may be able to do better (that is, pay less tax) if you can come up with 
“itemized deductions” in excess of $6,200. Taxpayers may deduct income taxes paid to a state, 
charitable contributions to qualifying organizations, real estate taxes, and interest paid on a 
mortgage to finance the purchase of a home, as well as other items.
Some people complain that high-income households receive a bigger benefit from deduc-
tions. For example, if a single person with very high income—let’s say more than $500,000—gave 
E con o m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
Calculating Taxes
One way to get a sense of the structure of the U.S. income 
tax system is to actually calculate what you would owe 
assuming your income was at one level or another. Suppose 
you are single with no dependents and you rent rather than 
own. Assume your charitable contributions are relatively 
modest as well. In that case, you are likely to take a “standard 
deduction” when filing your taxes.
Consider what happens to your tax payments as you go 
from $100,000 per year to $200,000. We will use the 2014 
tax schedule for this calculation. In 2014 single filers who 
were not claimed on anyone else’s tax return (many students 
are still claimed on their parents’ returns) and did not item-
ize were entitled to deduct $6,200 from their gross income 
before calculating their taxes. In our example, we will be 
comparing adjusted incomes of $93,800 versus $193,800. 
Notice that both before and after this adjustment the pretax 
incomes differ by $100,000.
Thinking PrAcTicAlly
1. if you are considering increasing your work hours, 
would you be more interested in your marginal tax 
rate or your average tax rate?
The 2014 tax table for single filers is reproduced here. As 
you see, the tax rate increases with income, making it a pro-
gressive system. In the last two columns we calculate the taxes 
owed at the two income levels.
Notice your average tax rate goes up with income given 
that the tax system is progressive. Also, the marginal tax rate is 
higher than the average tax rate, again reflecting the progres-
sivity of the tax system. In moving from $100,000 to $200,000 
in income, your marginal tax rate has increased from 28 
percent to 33 percent. At incomes higher than $406,750, the 
marginal tax rate is 39.6 percent.
Rate
On income  
between
Amount owed  
on $100K  
($93,800 taxed)
Amount owed  
on $200k  
($193,800 taxed)
  10%
$0–$9,075
$   908
$   908
  15%
$9,075–$36,900
$ 4,174
$ 4,174
  25%
$36,900–$89,350
$13,113
$13,113
  28%
$89,350–$186,350
$ 1,246
$27,160
  33%
$186,350–$405,100
      0
$ 2,459
  35% 
39.6%
$405,100–$406,750
$406,750+
      0
      0
      0
      0
Tax owed (sum)
$19,441
$47,814
Average tax rate (Tax/Income)
  0.194
  0.239
Marginal tax rate
      0.28
   0.33
426 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
a contribution of $1,000, she would save $396 because her marginal tax rate is 39.6 percent, the 
highest marginal tax rate. If another person had a taxable income of $20,000, the same $1,000 
charitable contribution would save her only $150 because she would face a marginal tax rate of 
15 percent. You can see that higher income households, facing higher marginal tax rates, have 
more incentives to seek deductions of various sorts.
This discussion gives you a taste of the U.S. Individual Income Tax. It is a complex tax 
system, and most people need help in figuring out how to comply with the law. One of the top 
priorities of each of the past five U.S. presidents has been to simplify the tax code, but little 
progress has been made.
Tax Incidence: Who Pays?
When a government levies a tax, it writes a law assigning responsibility for payment to specific 
people or specific organizations. To understand a tax, we must look beyond those named in the 
law as the initial taxpayers.
The burden of a tax is ultimately borne by individuals or households; institutions such as 
business firms and colleges have no real taxpaying capacity. Taxes paid by a firm ultimately 
fall on customers, owners or workers. Further, the burden of a tax is not always borne by those 
initially responsible for paying it. Directly or indirectly, tax burdens are often shifted to others. 
When we speak of the incidence of a tax, we are referring to the ultimate distribution of its bur-
den. We discussed the incidence of an excise tax in Chapter 5 and saw the way in which excise 
taxes, originally levied on firms, can get shifted to consumers. We continue the discussion of tax 
incidence here looking at several more complex types of taxes.
Tax shifting takes place when households alter their behavior to avoid paying a tax. Such 
shifting is easily accomplished when only certain items are singled out for taxation. In Chapter 5, 
we described an excise tax imposed only on artichokes and saw a dramatic shift in buying behav-
ior as consumers tried to avoid that excise tax, by shifting to other vegetables. In that case, with 
elastic consumer demand, prices did not rise very much in response to the tax and most of the tax 
burden was borne by the owners of the firm.
A tax such as the retail sales tax, which is levied at the same rate on all consumer goods, is 
harder for consumers to avoid. The only thing consumers can do to avoid such a tax is to con-
sume less of everything. If consumers consume less, saving will increase, but otherwise there are 
few opportunities for tax avoidance and therefore for tax shifting away from consumers. The 
demand for all consumer goods as a category is relatively inelastic, compared to the demand for 
a specific consumer good. For this reason, broad-based taxes are more difficult to shift. As we 
will see, these hard-to shift broad-based taxes also distort the economy less than narrower taxes.
The Incidence of Payroll Taxes
Table 19.1 shows that in 2014, 34.8 percent of federal revenues came from social insurance 
taxes, also called payroll taxes. The revenues from payroll taxes go to support Social Security, 
unemployment compensation, and other health and disability benefits for workers. Some of 
these taxes are levied on employers as a percentage of payroll, and some are levied on workers as 
a percentage of wages or salaries earned.
To analyze the payroll tax, let us take a tax levied on employers and sketch the reactions that 
are likely to follow. When the tax is first levied, firms find that the price of labor increases. Firms 
may react in two ways. First, they may substitute capital for the now more-expensive labor. Second, 
higher costs and lower profits may lead to a cut in production. Both reactions mean a lower demand 
for labor. Lower demand for labor reduces wages, and part of the tax is thus passed on (or shifted to) 
the workers, who end up earning less. The extent to which the tax is shifted to workers depends on 
how workers can react to the lower wages, or stated another way, how elastic is labor supply.
We can develop a more formal analysis of this situation with a picture of the market before 
the tax is levied. Figure 19.2 shows equilibrium in a hypothetical labor market with no payroll 
tax. Before we proceed, we should review the factors that determine the shapes of the supply-
and-demand curves.
19.2 Learning Objective
Discuss the incidence of 
 payroll taxes and corporate 
profits taxes.
tax incidence The ultimate 
distribution of a tax burden.
tax shifting Occurs when 
households can alter their 
behavior and do something to 
avoid paying a tax.
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 427 
Labor Supply and Labor Demand Curves in Perfect Competition: A review 
Recall 
that the demand for labor in perfectly competitive markets depends on its productivity. As you 
saw in Chapter 10, a perfectly competitive, profit-maximizing firm will hire labor up to the 
point at which the market wage is equal to labor’s marginal revenue product. The shape of the 
demand curve for labor shows how responsive firms are to changes in wages.
Recall from Chapter 6 that household behavior and thus the shape of the labor supply curve 
depend on the relative strengths of income and substitution effects. The labor supply curve rep-
resents the reaction of workers to changes in the wage rate. Household behavior depends on the 
after-tax wage that workers actually take home per hour of work. In contrast, labor demand is a 
function of the full amount that firms must pay per unit of labor, an amount that may include 
a tax if it is levied directly on payroll, as it is in our example. Such a tax, when present, drives a 
“wedge” between the price of labor that firms face and take-home wages.
imposing a Payroll Tax: Who Pays? 
In Figure 19.2, there were no taxes and the wage 
that firms paid was the same as the wage that workers took home. At a wage of W0, quantity 
of labor supplied and quantity of labor demanded were equal and the labor market was in 
equilibrium.1
But suppose employers must pay a tax of $T per unit of labor. Figure 19.3 shows a new 
curve that is parallel to the supply curve but above it by a vertical distance T. The new curve, S1, 
shows labor supply as a function of what firms pay. Note that S1 is not really a new supply curve. 
Supply is still determined by what workers take home. S1 simply adds T to the supply curve. 
Regardless of how the ultimate burden of the tax is shared, there is a difference between what 
firms pay and what workers take home.
If the initial wage is W0 per hour, firms will face a price of W0 + T per unit of labor 
immediately after the tax is levied. Workers still receive only W0, however. The higher wage 
rate—that is, the higher price of labor that firms now face—reduces the quantity of labor 
demanded from L0 to Ld, and the firms lay off workers. Workers initially still receive W0, so 
that amount of labor  supplied does not change, and the result is an excess supply of labor 
equal to (L0 - Ld).
The excess supply applies downward pressure to the market wage, and wages fall, shifting 
some of the tax burden onto workers. The issue is how far wages will fall. Figure 19.3 shows 
that a new equilibrium is achieved at W1, with firms paying W1 + T. When workers take home 
W1, they supply L1 units of labor. If firms must pay W1 + T, they will demand L1 units of labor, 
and the market clears. Quantity supplied again equals quantity demanded.
1 Although the supply curve has a positive slope, that slope implies nothing about the actual shape of the labor supply curve in 
the United States.
Supply
    (as a function
    of workers’
    take-home pay)
Demand
    (as a function of
    what ﬁrms pay)
W0
L0
0
Units of labor, L
Wage rate ($)
▴
◂Figure 19.2 
 
equilibrium in a 
Competitive Labor 
Market—No Taxes
With no taxes on wages, the 
wage that firms pay is the same 
as the wage that workers take 
home. At a wage of W0, the 
quantity of labor supplied and 
the quantity of labor demanded 
are equal.
428 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
In this case, then, employers and employees share the burden of the payroll tax. Initially, 
firms paid W0; after the tax, they pay W1 + T. Initially, workers received W0; after the tax, 
they end up with the lower wage W1. Total tax collections by the government are equal to 
T * L1. Geometrically, tax collections are equal to the entire shaded area in Figure 19.3. The 
workers’ share of the tax burden is the lower portion, (W0 - W1) * L1. The firms’ share is the 
upper portion, 3(W1 + T) - W04 * L1.
The relative sizes of the firms’ share and the workers’ share of the total tax burden depend 
on the shapes of the demand and supply curves. Figure 19.4, parts a and b, show that the ultimate 
burden of a payroll tax depends, at least in part, on the elasticity of labor supply. If labor supply is 
elastic (that is to say, responsive to price), take-home wages do not fall much and workers bear 
only a small portion of the tax. But if labor supply is inelastic, or unresponsive to price, most of 
the burden is borne by workers. An inelastic labor supply curve tells us that workers will continue 
to supply labor hours in more or less the same amount even if their wages fall as a result of the 
tax. Workers bear the bulk of the burden of a payroll tax if labor supply is relatively inelastic, and 
firms bear the bulk of the burden of a payroll tax if labor supply is relatively elastic.
Empirical studies of labor supply behavior in the United States suggest that for most of 
the workforce, the elasticity of labor supply is close to zero. Therefore; most of the payroll tax 
in the United States is probably borne by workers. Note, the result would be exactly the same 
if the tax were initially levied on workers rather than on firms. Go back to the equilibrium in 
Figure 19.3, with wages at W0. But now assume that the tax of $T per hour is levied on work-
ers rather than firms. The burden will end up being shared by firms and workers in the exact 
same proportions. Initially, take-home wages will fall to W0 - T. Workers will supply less labor, 
creating excess demand and pushing market wages up. That shifts part of the burden back to 
employers. The “story” is different, but the result is the same.
Not all economists agree that the payroll tax is borne entirely by wage earners. Even if 
labor supply is inelastic, some wages are set in the process of collective bargaining between 
unions and large firms. If the payroll tax results in a higher gross wage in the bargaining pro-
cess, firms may find themselves faced with higher costs. Higher costs either reduce profits to 
owners or are passed on to consumers in the form of higher product prices.
The payroll tax used in the United States today is regressive at the top income levels for two 
reasons. First, wages and salaries fall as a percentage of total income as we move up the income 
scale. Those with higher incomes earn a larger portion of their incomes from profits, dividends, 
and rents. These income sources are not part of the payroll tax base. Second, the base for the 
payroll tax in 2015 stopped at wages and salaries of $118,500.
Supply
    (as a function
    of workers’
    take-home pay)
Supply
    (as a function
    of what ﬁrms pay)
Demand
    (as a function of
    what ﬁrms pay)
W0
W1
L0
L1
Ld
0
Units of labor, L
Wage rate ($)
W0 + T
W1 + T
Workers’ share
Firms’ share
Total tax collection
S
T
T
S0
1
▴
▸Figure 19.3  
incidence of a Per-unit  
Payroll Tax in a 
Perfectly Competitive 
Labor Market
With a tax on firms of $T per 
unit of labor hired, the  market 
will adjust, shifting the tax 
partially to workers. When the 
tax is levied, firms must first 
pay W0 + T. This reduces the 
labor demand to Ld. The result 
is excess supply, which pushes 
wages down to W1 and passes 
some of the burden of the tax  
on to workers.
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 429 
The Incidence of Corporate Profits Taxes
Another tax that requires careful analysis is the corporate profits tax that is levied by the federal 
government as well as by most states. The corporate profits tax, or corporation income tax, is a tax on 
the profits of firms that are organized as corporations. Corporations are firms granted limited 
liability status by the government. Limited liability means that shareholders/owners can lose 
only what they have invested. The owners of partnerships and proprietorships do not enjoy limited 
liability and do not pay this tax; rather, they report their firms’ income directly on their indi-
vidual income tax returns.
We can think of the corporate tax as a tax on capital income, or profits, in one sector of the 
economy. For simplicity, we assume that there are only two sectors of the economy, corporate 
and noncorporate, and only two factors of production, labor and capital. Owners of capital 
receive profits, and workers (labor) are paid a wage.
Like the payroll tax, the corporate tax may affect households on the sources or the uses side 
of the income equation. The tax may affect profits earned by owners of capital, wages earned by 
workers, or prices of corporate and noncorporate products. Once again, the key question is how 
large these changes are likely to be.
When first imposed, the corporate profits tax initially reduces net (after-tax) profits in the 
corporate sector. Assuming the economy was in long-run equilibrium before the tax was levied, 
firms in both the corporate and noncorporate sectors were earning a normal rate of return; there 
was no reason to expect higher profits in one sector than in the other. Suddenly, firms in the 
W0
W1
L1
S1
S0
L
D
D
0
Units of labor
Wage rate ($)
W1 + T
Workers’ share
Firms’ share
T
W0
W1
L1
S1
S0
L
a.
b.
0
Units of labor
Wage rate ($)
W1 + T
T
▴
◂Figure 19.4 Payroll 
Tax with elastic (a) 
and inelastic (b) Labor 
Supply
The ultimate burden of a payroll 
tax depends on the elasticities of 
labor supply and labor demand. 
For example, if supply is relatively 
elastic, as in part a, the burden 
falls largely on employers; if the 
supply is relatively inelastic, as in 
part b, the burden falls largely on 
workers.
430 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
corporate sector become significantly less profitable as a result of the tax. (In 2015, for example, 
the tax rate applicable to most corporations was 35 percent.)
In response to these lower profits, capital investment begins to favor the nontaxed sector 
because after-tax profits are higher there. Firms in the taxed sector contract in size or (in some 
cases) go out of business, whereas firms in the nontaxed sector expand and new firms enter its 
various industries. As this happens, the flow of capital from the taxed to the nontaxed sector 
reduces the profit rate in the nontaxed sector: More competition springs up, and product prices 
are driven down. Some of the tax burden shifts to capital income earners in the noncorporate 
sector, who end up earning lower profits.
As capital flows out of the corporate sector in response to lower after-tax profits, the profit 
rate in that sector rises somewhat because fewer firms means less supply, which means higher 
prices, and so on. Presumably, capital will continue to favor the nontaxed sector until the after-
tax profit rates in the two sectors are equal. Even though the tax is imposed on just one sector, it 
eventually depresses after-tax profits in all sectors equally.
Under these circumstances, the products of corporations will probably become more 
expensive and products of proprietorships and partnerships will probably become less expen-
sive. But because almost everyone buys both corporate and noncorporate products, these excise 
effects (that is, effects on the prices of products) are likely to have a minimal impact on the dis-
tribution of the tax burden. In essence, the price increases in the corporate sector and the price 
decreases in the noncorporate sector cancel each other out.
Finally, what effect does the imposition of a corporate income tax have on labor? Wages 
could actually rise or fall, but the effect is not likely to be large. Taxed firms will have an incen-
tive to substitute labor for capital because capital income is now taxed. This could benefit labor 
by driving up wages. In addition, the contracting sector will use less labor and capital, but if the 
taxed sector is the capital-intensive corporate sector, the bulk of the effect will be felt by capital. 
The price of capital will fall more than the price of labor.
The Burden of the Corporate Tax 
The ultimate burden of the corporate tax appears 
to depend on several factors: the relative capital/labor intensity of the two sectors, the ease 
with which capital and labor can be substituted in the two sectors, and elasticities of demand 
for the products of each sector. In 1962, economist Arnold Harberger, then of the University 
of Chicago, analyzed this and concluded that owners of corporations, proprietorships, and 
partnerships all bear the burden of the corporate tax in rough proportion to profits, even 
though it is directly levied only on corporations. Harberger also found that wage effects of 
the corporate tax were small and that excise effects, as we just noted, probably cancel each 
other out.2
Much has been written about the incidence of the corporate tax since Harberger, but the 
general conclusion that capital owners bear most of the tax burden is still viewed as correct by 
most economists.
One exception to this conclusion is corporate taxation of a monopolist. You might be 
tempted to conclude that because monopolists can control market price, they will simply pass 
on the profits tax in the form of higher prices to consumers of monopoly products. But theory 
predicts just the opposite: that the tax burden will remain with the monopolist.
Remember that monopolists are constrained by market demand. That is, they choose the 
combination of price and output that is consistent with market demand and that maximizes 
profit. If a proportion of that profit is taxed, the choice of price and quantity will not change. 
Why not? Quite simply, if you behave so as to maximize profit and then I come and take half of 
your profit, you maximize your half by maximizing the whole, which is exactly what you would 
do in the absence of the tax. Thus, your price and output do not change, the tax is shifted, and 
you end up paying the tax. In the long run, capital will not leave the taxed monopoly sector, as it 
did in the competitive case. Even with the tax, the monopolist is earning higher profits than are 
possible elsewhere.
2 Arnold Harberger, “The Incidence of the Corporate Income Tax,” Journal of Political Economy, LXX, June 1962.
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 431 
The Overall Incidence of Taxes in the United States: 
Empirical Evidence
Many researchers have done complete analyses under varying assumptions about tax incidence, 
and in most cases their results are similar. State and local taxes (with sales taxes playing a big 
role) seem as a group to be mildly regressive. Federal taxes, dominated by the individual income 
tax but increasingly affected by the regressive payroll tax, are mildly progressive. The overall 
system is mildly progressive.
Excess Burdens and the Principle  
of Neutrality
You have seen that when households and firms make decisions in the presence of a tax that 
differ from decisions they would make in its absence, the burden of the tax can be shifted from 
those for whom it was originally intended. Now we can take the same logic one step further. 
When taxes distort economic conditions, they impose burdens on society that, in aggregate, 
exceed the revenue collected by the government.
The amount by which the burden of a tax exceeds the total revenue collected by the govern-
ment is called the excess burden of the tax. The total burden of a tax is the sum of the revenue 
 collected from the tax and the excess burden created by the tax. Because excess burdens are a 
form of waste, or lost value, tax policy should be written to minimize them. (Excess burdens are 
also called deadweight losses.)
The size of the excess burden imposed by a tax depends on the extent to which economic 
decisions are distorted. The general principle that emerges from the analysis of excess burdens 
is the principle of neutrality. Ceteris paribus, or all else equal,3 a tax that is neutral with respect to 
economic decisions is preferred to one that distorts economic decisions.
In practice, all taxes change behavior and distort economic choices. A product-specific 
excise tax raises the price of the taxed item, and people can avoid the tax by buying substitutes. 
An income tax distorts the choice between present and future consumption and between work 
and leisure. The corporate tax influences investment and production decisions, and investment 
is diverted away from the corporate sector. As we have already seen, the size of a tax distortion 
will depend on how elastic the parties are to the transaction. If both parties are elastic, taxing 
that market will bring large distortions and create large excess burdens.
Measuring Excess Burdens
It is possible to measure the size of excess burdens if we know something about how people 
respond to price changes. Look at the demand curve in Figure 19.5. The product originally sold 
for a price, P0, equal to marginal cost (which, for simplicity, we assume is constant). Recall that 
when input prices are determined in competitive markets, marginal cost reflects the real value 
of the resources used in producing the product.
To measure the total burden of the tax, we need to recall the notion of consumer surplus 
from Chapter 4. At any price, some people pay less for a product than it is worth to them. All we 
reveal when we buy a product is that it is worth at least the price being charged. For example, if 
only 1 unit of product X were auctioned, someone would pay a price close to D in Figure 19.5. 
By paying only P0, that person received a “surplus” equal to (D – P0). (For a review of consumer 
surplus and how it is measured, see Chapters 4 and 6.)
Consider what happens when an excise tax raises the price of X from P0 to P1 = P0 + T, 
where T is the tax per unit of X. First, the government collects revenue. The amount of revenue 
19.3 Learning Objective
Summarize the causes and 
 effects of excess burdens.
excess burden The amount 
by which the burden of a tax 
exceeds the total revenue col-
lected. Also called deadweight 
loss.
principle of neutrality All else 
equal, taxes that are neutral 
with respect to economic deci-
sions (that is, taxes that do not 
distort economic decisions) are 
generally preferable to taxes 
that distort economic deci-
sions. Taxes that are not neu-
tral impose excess burdens.
3 The phrase ceteris paribus (all else equal) is important. In judging the merits of a tax or a change in tax policy, the degree of neu-
trality is only one criterion among many, and it often comes into conflict with others. For example, tax A may impose a larger 
excess burden than tax B, but society may deem A more equitable.
432 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
collected is equal to T times the number of units of X purchased (X1). You can see that T * X1 is 
equal to the area of rectangle P1 ABP0. Second, because consumers must now pay a price of P1, 
the consumer  surplus generated in the market is reduced from the area of triangle DCP0 to the 
area of the smaller triangle DAP1. The excess burden is equal to the original (pretax) consumer 
surplus minus the after-tax surplus minus the total taxes collected by the government.
In other words, the original value of consumer surplus (triangle DCP0) has been broken up 
into three parts: the area of triangle DAP1 that is still consumer surplus, the area of rectangle P1 
ABP0 that is tax revenue collected by the government, and the area of triangle ACB that is lost. 
Thus, the area ACB is an approximate measure of the excess burden of the tax. The total burden 
of the tax is the sum of the revenue collected and the excess burden: the area of P1 ACP0.
Excess Burdens and the Degree of Distortion
The size of the excess burden that results from a decision-distorting tax depends on the degree 
to which decisions change in response to that tax. In the case of an excise tax, consumer 
 behavior is reflected in elasticity of demand. The more elastic the demand curve, the greater the 
distortion caused by any given tax rate.
Figure 19.6 shows how the size of the consumer response determines the size of the excess 
burden. At price P0, the quantity demanded by consumers is X0. Now suppose that the govern-
ment imposes a tax of $T per unit of X. The two demand curves (D1 and D2) illustrate two possible 
responses by consumers. The change in quantity demanded along D1 (from X0 to X1) is greater 
than the change in quantity demanded along D2 (from X0 to X2). In other words, the response of 
consumers illustrated by D1 is more elastic than the response of consumers along D2.
The excess burdens that would result from the tax under the two assumptions about 
demand elasticity are approximately equal to the areas of the shaded triangles in Figure 19.6. As 
you can see, where demand is more responsive (more elastic), the excess burden is larger.
If demand were perfectly inelastic, no distortion would occur and there would be no excess 
burden. The tax would simply transfer part of the surplus being earned by consumers to the 
government. That is why some economists favor uniform land taxes over other taxes. Because 
land is in perfectly inelastic supply, a uniform tax on all land uses distorts economic decisions 
less than taxes levied on other factors of production that are in variable supply.
The Principle of Second Best
Now that we have established the connection between taxes that distort decisions and 
excess burdens, we can add more complexity to our previous discussions. Although it may 
seem that distorting taxes always creates excess burdens, this is not necessarily the case. A 
19.4 Learning Objective
Explain the principle of second 
best.
X0
X1
C
A
D
B
Demand
0
Excess burden/
Deadweight loss
Units of good X
Price per unit ($)
P1 = P0 + T
P0 = MC
T
▴
▸Figure 19.5 The 
excess Burden of a 
Distorting excise Tax
A tax that alters economic 
 decisions imposes a burden that 
exceeds the amount of taxes col-
lected. An excise tax that raises 
the price of a good above mar-
ginal cost drives some consumers 
to buy less desirable substitutes, 
reducing consumer surplus.
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 433 
distorting tax is sometimes desirable when other distortions already exist in the economy. 
This is called the  principle of second best. At least two kinds of circumstances favor non-
neutral (that is, distorting) taxes: the presence of externalities and the presence of other 
 distorting taxes.
We already examined externalities at some length in Chapter 16. If some activity by a firm 
or household imposes costs on society that are not considered by decision makers, firms and 
households are likely to make economically inefficient choices. Pollution is the classic example 
of an externality, but there are thousands of others. An efficient allocation of resources can be 
restored if a tax is imposed on the externality-generating activity that is equal to the value of the 
damages caused by it. Such a tax forces the decision maker to consider the full economic cost of 
the decision.
Because taxing for externalities changes decisions that would otherwise be made, it does 
in a sense “distort” economic decisions. But its purpose is to force decision makers to consider 
real costs that they would otherwise ignore. In the case of pollution, for example, the distortion 
caused by a tax is desirable. Instead of causing an excess burden, it results in an efficiency gain. 
(Review Chapter 16 if this is not clear.)
A distorting tax can also improve economic welfare when other taxes are present that 
already distort decisions. Suppose there were only three goods, X, Y, and Z, and a 5 percent 
excise tax on Y and Z. The taxes on Y and Z distort consumer decisions away from those goods 
and toward X. Imposing a similar tax on X reduces the distortion of the existing system of taxes. 
When consumers face equal taxes on all goods, they cannot avoid the tax by changing what they 
buy. The distortion caused by imposing a tax on X corrects for a preexisting distortion—the 
taxes on Y and Z.
Optimal Taxation
The idea that taxes work together to affect behavior has led tax theorists to search for optimal 
taxation systems. Knowing how people will respond to taxes would allow us to design a sys-
tem that would minimize the overall excess burden. For example, if we know the elasticity of 
demand for all traded goods, we can devise an optimal system of excise taxes that are heaviest 
on those goods with relatively inelastic demand and lightest on those goods with relatively 
elastic demands.
Of course, it is impossible to collect all the information required to implement the optimal 
tax systems that have been suggested. This point brings us full circle, and we end up where 
principle of second best The 
fact that a tax distorts an 
economic decision does not 
always imply that such a tax 
imposes an excess burden. if 
there are previously existing 
distortions, such a tax may 
actually improve efficiency.
P0
P1
X1
X2
X0
D1
D2
0
Units of good X
Price per unit ($)
D2 Less elastic,
      smaller excess
      burden
D1 More elastic,
      larger excess
      burden
T
▴
◂Figure 19.6 The Size 
of the excess Burden of 
a Distorting excise Tax 
Depends on the elasticity 
of Demand
The size of the excess burden 
from a distorting tax depends 
on the degree to which decisions 
or behaviors change in response 
to it.
434 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
Economic Income = Consumption + Change in Net Worth
we started, with the principle of neutrality: All else equal, taxes that are neutral with respect to 
 economic decisions are generally preferable to taxes that distort economic decisions. Taxes that 
are not neutral impose excess burdens.
Tax Equity
Thus far we have been discussing the efficiency issues involved with levying particular types 
of taxes. But, one of the criteria for evaluating the economy that we defined in Chapter 1 (and 
returned to in Chapter 18) was fairness, or equity. In the area of taxation, most policy makers 
also wish to consider fairness as a consideration for tax system design. Everyone agrees all of 
us should pay our “fair share” of taxes, but there is endless debate about what constitutes a fair 
tax system.
One theory of fairness is called the benefits-received principle. Dating back to the 
 eighteenth-century economist Adam Smith and earlier writers, the benefits-received principle 
holds that taxpayers should contribute to government according to the benefits they derive 
from public expenditures. This principle ties the tax side of the fiscal equation to the expenditure 
side. For example, the owners and users of cars pay gasoline and automotive excise taxes, which 
are paid into the Federal Highway Trust Fund to build and maintain the federal highway system. 
The beneficiaries of public highways are thus taxed in rough proportion to their use of those 
highways.
The difficulty with applying the benefits principle is that many public expenditures are for 
public goods—national defense, for example. The benefits of public goods fall collectively on 
all members of society, and there is no way to determine what value individual taxpayers receive 
from them.
A different principle, and one that has dominated the formulation of tax policy in the 
United States for decades, is the ability-to-pay principle. This principle holds that taxpayers 
should bear tax burdens in line with their ability to pay. Here the tax side of the fiscal equation 
is viewed separately from the expenditure side. Under this system, the problem of attributing 
the benefits of public expenditures to specific taxpayers or groups of taxpayers is avoided.
Horizontal and Vertical equity 
If we believe that, on fairness grounds, ability to pay 
should be the basis for the distribution of tax burdens, two principles follow. First, the prin-
ciple of horizontal equity holds that those with equal ability to pay should bear equal tax bur-
dens. Second, the principle of vertical equity holds that those with greater ability to pay should 
pay more.
To implement these principles, we need to first answer two interdependent questions. First, 
how is ability to pay measured? What is the “best” tax base? Second, if A has a greater ability to 
pay than B, how much more should A contribute?
What Is the “Best” Tax Base?
The three leading candidates for best tax base are income, consumption, and wealth.
Income—to be precise, economic income—is anything that enhances your ability to command 
resources. The technical definition of economic income is the value of what you consume plus 
any change in the value of what you own:
19.5 Learning Objective
Explain what is meant by  
tax equity.
benefits-received principle  
A theory of fairness holding 
that taxpayers should con-
tribute to government (in the 
form of taxes) in proportion to 
the benefits they receive from 
 public expenditures.
ability-to-pay principle  
A theory of taxation holding 
that citizens should bear tax 
burdens in line with their  
ability to pay taxes.
This broad definition includes many items not counted by the Internal Revenue Service and 
some items the Census Bureau does not include in its definition of “money income.” Economic 
income includes all money receipts, whether from employment, interest on savings, dividends, 
profits, or transfers from the government. It also includes the value of benefits not received in 
money form, such as medical benefits, employer retirement contributions, paid country club 
memberships, and so on. Increases or decreases in the value of stocks or bonds, whether or not 
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 435 
they are “realized” through sale, are part of economic income. For income tax purposes, capital 
gains (increases in the value of assets, like shares of stock) count as income only when they are 
realized, but for purposes of defining economic income, all increases in asset values count, 
whether they are realized or not.
A few other items that we do not usually think of as income are included in a comprehen-
sive definition of income. If you own your house outright and live in it rent free, income flows 
from your house just as interest flows from a bond or profit from a share of stock. By owning 
the house, you enjoy valuable housing benefits for which you would otherwise have to pay rent. 
Other components of economic income include any gifts and bequests received and food grown 
at home. In economic terms, income is income regardless of source and use.
Consumption is the total value of goods and services that a household consumes in a given 
period.
Wealth, or net worth, is the value of all the goods and services you own after your liabilities are 
subtracted. If today you were to sell everything of value you own—stocks, bonds, houses, cars, 
and so on—at their current market prices and pay off all your debts—loans, mortgages, and so 
on—you would end up with your net worth.
Net worth = Assets - Liabilities
Remember, income and consumption are flow measures. We speak of income per month or 
per year. Wealth and net worth are stock measures at a point in time.
income versus Consumption as the Best Tax Base 
In the United States, the principle 
base for household taxation is income, as we saw in Table 19.1. In most other developed econo-
mies the value-added tax (VAT), which is a tax on consumption, dominates. Arguments about 
whether  income or consumption is a “better” tax base touch on concerns both of efficiency and 
equity.
The view favoring consumption as the fairest tax base dates back to at least the seventeenth-
century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes, who argued that people should pay taxes in 
accordance with “what they actually take out of the common pot, not what they leave in.” The 
standard of living, the argument goes, depends not on income, but on how much income is 
spent. If we want to redistribute well-being, therefore, the tax base should be consumption 
because consumption is the best measure of well-being.
A second argument in favor of consumption as a base for taxation with a distinguished 
history dates back to work done by Irving Fisher in the early part of the last century. Fisher 
and many others have argued that a tax on consumption is both fairer and more efficient 
than one based on income. Central to Fisher’s argument is the view that income discourages 
saving by taxing savings twice. A story told originally by Fisher illustrates this theory nicely.4
Suppose Alex builds a house for Frank. In exchange, Frank pays Alex $10,000 and gives 
him an orchard containing 100 apple trees. Alex spends the $10,000 today, but he saves the 
orchard. Each year that orchard will bear fruit which Alex will sell. At year’s end, the state levies 
a 10  percent tax on Alex’s total income, which includes the $10,000 and the value of the orchard. 
First, the government takes 10 percent of the $10,000, which is 10 percent of Alex’s consump-
tion. Second, it takes 10 percent of the orchard—10 trees—which is 10 percent of the value of 
Alex’s orchard on the grounds that this was part of his income this year. So far, there appears 
to be no double counting. But in year 2, the orchard bears fruit which Alex sells. The income 
tax will also be levied on the proceeds of those sales. Indeed, every year thereafter Alex is taxed 
on the income that orchard generates. If the income tax is levied in the year after that, Alex 
will again be taxed on the income generated by his orchard, and so on. Fisher and others argue 
this is unfair: The income tax system taxes Alex’s saving more than once. The full value of the 
orchard was taxed as income in year 1, and then the earnings from the saving of the orchard was 
taxed again in subsequent years. To tax the orchard fairly, it is argued, the system should take 10 
4 Irving Fisher and Herbert Fisher, Constructive Income Taxation: A Proposal for Reform (New York: Harper, 1942), Ch. 8, p. 56.
436 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
percent of the trees or 10 percent of the fruit going forward—but not both! To avoid the double 
taxation of savings, either the original savings of 100 trees should not be taxed or the income 
generated from the after-tax number of trees (90) should not be taxed.
The same logic can be applied to cash savings. You are taxed when you earn $100, and then 
taxed again on the interest income generated by that same $100 if you choose to put it in the 
bank rather than spend it.
There are also efficiency issues associated with taxing consumption versus income. As 
you recall, a tax that distorts economic choices creates excess burdens. By double-taxing savings, 
an income tax distorts the choice between consumption and saving, which is really the choice 
between present consumption and future consumption. Excess burden or deadweight loss 
results. Consumption taxes are less distortionary.
Not everyone agrees with Fisher’s argument. Many argue that income is the best measure of 
your capacity to command resources today. According to proponents of income as a tax base, 
fairness suggests you should be taxed not on what you actually draw out of the common pot, 
but rather on the basis of your ability to draw from that pot. In other words, your decision to 
save or consume is no different from your decision to buy apples, to go out for dinner, or to give 
money to your mother. It is your income that enables you to do all these things, and it is income 
that should be taxed, regardless of its sources and regardless of how you use it. Saving is just 
another use of income.
If income is the best measure of ability to pay, the double taxation argument doesn’t hold 
true. An income tax taxes savings twice only if consumption is the measure used to gauge a per-
son’s ability to pay. It does not do so if income is the measure used. Acquisition of the orchard 
enhances your ability to pay today; a bountiful crop of fruit enhances your ability to pay when it 
is produced. Interest income is no different from any other form of income; it too enhances your 
ability to pay and is thus fair.
Wealth as the Best Tax Base 
Still others argue that the real power to command resources 
comes not from any single year’s income, but from accumulated wealth. Aggregate net worth in 
the United States is many times larger than aggregate income.
If two people have identical annual incomes of $10,000 but one of them also has an accu-
mulated net worth of $1 million, is it reasonable to argue that these two people have the same 
ability to pay or that they should pay equal taxes? Most people would answer no.
Those who promote a wealth-based system also argue that the only real way to redistribute 
economic power is to tax the high concentrations of wealth. Of course, it is important to note 
that if income is already taxed, a wealth tax results in double-taxation.
One of the oldest and most common forms of taxation in the world is the taxation of 
property, or wealth, held by an individual at the time of his or her death. The property owned 
at the time of a person’s death is called the person’s estate. An estate tax is a tax on the total 
value of a person’s estate regardless of how it is distributed. The United States levies a Gift 
and Estate Tax on gifts made over a person’s lifetime and the value of the person’s estate, for 
estates over a certain level. The Federal Gift and Estate Tax, which raises less than 2 percent 
of total tax revenues, was phased out for one year in 2010 under a law passed by Congress in 
2001. As part of the budget crisis resolution in late 2012, Congress voted to resume an estate 
tax. In 2015 the exemption per estate was $5,430,000, and the tax rate was 40 percent on any 
excess over that limit.
You might well think that the estate tax performs well on efficiency grounds, given that 
we cannot escape the tax by not dying! Excess burden would thus appear to be low. As it turns 
out, however, there are methods the wealthy can use to shift wealth into nontaxable forms. The 
larger the number of loopholes to the estate tax, the more shifting there will be and the larger 
will be the excess burden. Wealthy individuals can also choose to save less for their children, 
another behavioral distortion with excess burden.
No Simple Answer 
Virtually every country in the world has a system of taxation that taxes 
all three bases. In the United States, for example, there are sales and excise taxes (consumption 
taxes), the Federal Gift and Estate Tax (a wealth tax), the Individual Income Tax, and the local 
property tax (another wealth tax).
estate The property that a 
person owns at the time of his 
or her death.
estate tax A tax on the total 
value of a person’s estate.
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 437 
It is also important to point out that for many U.S. taxpayers, the Individual Income 
Tax is probably closer to being a consumption tax than an income tax because much of 
household  savings can be deducted from income before the tax is figured. The tax code (or 
law) is full of subsidies and incentives. Among the most significant incentives built into 
the system are  provisions designed to encourage people to save by reducing taxation on 
those savings.
Social Choice
One view of government, or the public sector, holds that it exists to provide things that  “society 
wants.” A society is a collection of individuals, and each has a unique set of preferences. Defining 
what society wants, therefore, becomes a problem of social choice—of somehow adding up, or 
aggregating, individual preferences.
It is also important to understand that government is made up of individuals—politi-
cians and government workers—whose own objectives in part determine what government 
does. To understand government, we must understand the incentives facing politicians and 
public  servants, as well as the difficulties of aggregating the preferences of the members of a 
society.
The Voting Paradox
Democratic societies use ballot procedures to determine aggregate preferences and to make the 
social decisions that follow from them. If all votes could be unanimous, efficient decisions would 
be guaranteed. Unfortunately, unanimity is virtually impossible to achieve when hundreds of 
millions of people, with their own different preferences, are involved.
The most common social decision-making mechanism is majority rule, but it is not  perfect. 
In 1951, economist Kenneth Arrow proved the impossibility theorem5—that it is  impossible 
to devise a voting system that respects individual preferences and gives consistent, nonarbitrary 
results.
One example of a seemingly irrational result emerging from majority-rule voting is the 
voting paradox. Suppose that faced with a decision about the future of the institution, the 
president of a major university opts to let its top three administrators vote on the following 
options: Should the university (A) increase the number of students and hire more faculty, 
(B) maintain the current size of the faculty and student body, or (C) cut back on faculty and 
reduce the student body? Figure 19.7 represents the preferences of the three administrators 
diagrammatically.
The vice president for finance (VP1) wants growth, preferring A to B and B to C. The vice 
president for development (VP2), however, does not want to rock the boat, preferring the main-
tenance of the current size of the institution, option B, to either of the others. If the status quo is 
out of the question, VP2 would prefer option C. The dean believes in change, wanting to shake 
the place up and not caring whether that means an increase or a decrease. The dean prefers C to 
A and A to B.
Table 19.2 shows the results of the vote. When the three vote on A versus B, they vote in 
favor of A—to increase the size of the university instead of keeping it the same size. VP1 and the 
dean outvote VP2. Voting on B and C produces a victory for option B; two of the three would 
prefer to hold the line than to decrease the size of the institution. After two votes, we have the 
result that A (an increase) is preferred to B (no change) and that B (no change) is preferred to C 
(a decrease).
The problem arises when we have the three vote on A against C. Both VP2 and the dean vote 
for C, giving it the victory; C is actually preferred to A. Nevertheless, if A beats B and B beats C, 
how can C beat A? The results are inconsistent.
19.6 Learning Objective
Discuss social choice theories 
and issues.
social choice The problem of 
deciding what society wants. 
The process of adding up 
 individual preferences to make 
a choice for society as a whole.
5 Kenneth Arrow, Social Choice and Individual Values (New York: John Wiley, 1951).
impossibility theorem  
A proposition demonstrated 
by kenneth Arrow showing 
that no system of aggregating 
individual preferences into 
social decisions will always 
yield consistent, nonarbitrary 
results.
438 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
The voting paradox illustrates several points. Most important is that when preferences for 
public goods differ among individuals, any system for adding up, or aggregating, those prefer-
ences can lead to inconsistencies. In addition, it illustrates just how much influence the person 
who sets the agenda has. If a vote had been taken on A and C first, the first two votes might never 
have occurred. This is why rules committees in both houses of Congress have enormous power; 
they establish the rules under which, as well as the order in which, legislation will be considered.
Another problem with majority-rule voting is that it leads to logrolling. Logrolling occurs 
when representatives trade votes—D helps get a majority in favor of E’s program; in exchange, 
E helps D get a majority on D’s program. It is not clear whether any bill could get through any 
legislature without logrolling. It is also not clear whether logrolling is, on balance, a good thing 
or a bad thing from the standpoint of efficiency. On the one hand, a program that benefits one 
region or group of people might generate enormous net social gains, but because the group 
of beneficiaries is fairly small, it will not command a majority of delegates. If another bill that 
is likely to generate large benefits to another area is also awaiting a vote, a trade of support 
between the two sponsors of the bills should result in the passage of two good pieces of efficient 
legislation. On the other hand, logrolling can also turn out unjustified, inefficient pork barrel 
legislation.
A number of other problems also follow from voting as a mechanism for public choice. 
For one, voters do not have much of an incentive to become well informed. When you go out 
to buy a car or, on a smaller scale, an iPod, you are the one who suffers the full consequences 
of a bad choice. Similarly, you are the beneficiary of the gains from a good choice. This is not 
so in voting. Although many of us believe that we have a civic responsibility to vote, no one 
really believes that his or her vote will actually determine the outcome of an election. The time 
and effort it takes just to get to the polls are enough to deter many people. Becoming informed 
involves even more costs, and it is not surprising that many people do not do it.
Beyond the fact that a single vote is not likely to be decisive is the fact that the costs and 
 benefits of wise and unwise social choices are widely shared. If the congressperson whom you 
elect makes a big mistake and wastes a billion dollars, you bear only a small fraction of that cost. 
Even though the sums involved are large in aggregate, individual voters find little incentive to 
become informed.
Two additional problems with voting are that choices are almost always limited to bundles 
of publicly provided goods and that we vote infrequently. Many of us vote for Republicans or 
Democrats. We vote for president only every 4 years. We elect senators for 6-year terms. In 
 private markets, we can look at each item separately and decide how much of each item we 
voting paradox A simple 
demonstration of how 
majority- rule voting can lead 
to seemingly contradictory and 
inconsistent results. A com-
monly cited illustration of the 
kind of inconsistency described 
in the impossibility theorem.
logrolling Occurs when 
congressional representatives 
trade votes, agreeing to help 
each other get certain pieces of 
legislation passed.
Option A
Option B
Option C
Hire more faculty
No change
Reduce the size of the faculty
Ranking
1
2
3
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
VP1
VP2
Dean
▴
▸Figure 19.7 
 
Preferences of Three Top 
university Officials
VP1 prefers A to B and B to c. 
VP2 prefers B to c and c to A. 
The dean prefers c to A and  
A to B.
Table 19.2  Results of Voting on University’s Plans:  
The Voting Paradox
Votes of:
Vote
VP1
VP2
Dean
Resulta
A versus B
A
B
A
A wins: A > B
B versus C
B
B
C
B wins: B > C
C versus A
A
C
C
C wins: C > A
a A > B is read “A is preferred to B.”
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 439 
want. We also can shop daily. In the public sector, though, we vote for a platform or a party that 
takes a particular position on a whole range of issues. In the public sector it is difficult, or impos-
sible, for voters to unbundle issues.
There is, of course, a reason why bundling occurs in the sphere of public choice. It is 
 difficult enough to convince people to go to the polls once a year. If we voted separately on every 
appropriation bill, we would spend our lives at the polls. This is one reason for representative 
democracy. We elect officials who we hope will become informed and represent our interests 
and preferences.
Government Inefficiency: Theory of Public Choice
Recent work in economics has focused not just on the government as an extension of indi-
vidual preferences but also on government officials as people with their own agendas and 
objectives. That is, government officials are assumed to maximize their own utility, not the 
social good. To understand the way government functions, we need to look less at the prefer-
ences of individual members of society and more at the incentive structures that exist around 
public officials.
The officials whom we seem to worry about are the people who run government  agencies—
the Social Security Administration, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, and 
state registries of motor vehicles, for example. What incentive do these people have to produce a 
good product and to be efficient? Might such incentives be lacking?
In the private sector, where firms compete for profits, only efficient firms producing goods 
that consumers will buy survive. If a firm is inefficient—if it is producing at a higher- than-
necessary cost—the market will drive it out of business. This is not necessarily so in the public 
sector. If a government bureau is producing a necessary service or one that is mandated by law, 
it does not need to worry about customers. No matter how bad the service is at the registry of 
motor vehicles, everyone with a car must buy its product.
The efficiency of a government agency’s internal structure depends on the way incen-
tives facing workers and agency heads are structured. If the budget allocation of an agency is 
based on the last period’s spending alone, for example, agency heads have a clear incentive to 
spend more money, however inefficiently. This point is not lost on government officials, who 
have experimented with many ways of rewarding agency heads and employees for cost-saving 
suggestions.
However, critics say such efforts to reward productivity and punish inefficiency are rarely 
successful. It is difficult to punish, let alone dismiss, a government employee. Elected officials are 
subject to recall, but it usually takes gross negligence to rouse voters into instituting such a mea-
sure. Also, elected officials are rarely associated with problems of bureaucratic  mismanagement, 
which they decry daily.
Critics of “the bureaucracy” argue that no set of internal incentives can ever match the dis-
cipline of the market. They point to studies of private versus public garbage collection, airline 
operations, fire protection, mail service, and so on, all of which suggest significantly lower costs 
in the private sector. A number of politicians and policy analysts favor “privatization.” If the 
private sector can possibly provide a service, it is likely to do so more efficiently—so the public 
sector should allow the private sector to take over.
One concern regarding wholesale privatization is the potential effect it may have on distribu-
tion. Late in his administration, President Ronald Reagan suggested that the federal government sell 
its entire stock of public housing to the private sector. Would the private sector continue to provide 
housing to poor people? The worry is that it would not because it may not be profitable to do so.
Like voters, public officials suffer from a lack of incentive to become fully informed and 
to make tough choices. Consider an elected official. If the real objective of an elected official is 
to get reelected, then the real incentive must be to provide visible goods for that official’s con-
stituency while hiding the costs or spreading them thin. Self-interest may easily lead to poor 
 decisions and public irresponsibility.
Looking at the public sector from the standpoint of the behavior of public officials and the 
potential for inefficient choices and bureaucratic waste rather than in terms of its potential for 
improving the allocation of resources has become quite popular. This is the viewpoint of what 
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
440 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
is called the public choice field in economics that builds heavily on the work of Nobel laureate 
James Buchanan.
Rent-Seeking Revisited
Another problem with public choice is that special-interest groups can and do spend resources 
to influence the legislative process. As we said before, individual voters have little incentive to 
become well informed and to participate fully in the legislative process. Favor-seeking special-
interest groups have a great deal of incentive to participate in political decision making. We saw 
in Chapter 13 that a monopolist would be willing to pay to prevent competition from eroding its 
economic profits. Many—if not all—industries lobby for favorable treatment, softer regulation, 
or antitrust exemption. This, as you recall, is rent-seeking.
Rent-seeking extends far beyond those industries that lobby for government help in pre-
serving monopoly powers. Any group that benefits from a government policy has an incentive 
to use its resources to lobby for that policy. Farmers lobby for farm subsidies, oil producers 
lobby for oil import taxes, and the American Association of Retired Persons lobbies against cuts 
in Social Security.
In the absence of well-informed and active voters, special-interest groups assume an impor-
tant and perhaps critical role. But there is another side to this story. Some have argued that 
favorable legislation is, in effect, for sale in the marketplace. Those willing and able to pay the 
most are more successful in accomplishing their goals than those with fewer resources. Theory 
may suggest that unregulated markets fail to produce an efficient allocation of resources. This 
should not lead you to the conclusion that government involvement necessarily leads to effi-
ciency. There are reasons to believe that government attempts to efficiently produce the right 
goods and services in the right quantities will often fail.
S u m m a r y 
19.1 ThE BASICS Of TAxATION p. 423 
1. Public finance is one of the major subfields of applied 
 economics. A major interest within this subfield is the 
 economics of taxation.
2. Taxes are ultimately paid by people. Taxes may be imposed 
on transactions, institutions, property, and all kinds of other 
things, but in the final analysis, taxes are paid by individuals 
or households because they own all factors of production.
3. The base of a tax is the measure or value upon which the tax 
is levied. The rate structure of a tax determines the portion of 
the base that must be paid in tax.
4. A tax whose burden is a constant proportion of income for 
all households is a proportional tax. A tax that exacts a higher 
proportion of income from higher-income households 
is a progressive tax. A tax that enacts a lower proportion of 
income from higher-income households is a regressive tax. 
In the United States, income taxes are progressive and sales 
and excise taxes are regressive.
5. Your average tax rate is the total amount of tax you pay 
divided by your total income. Your marginal tax rate is the 
tax rate that you pay on your next dollar of income that you 
have earned. Marginal tax rates have the most influence on 
behavior.
19.2 TAx INCIDENCE: WhO PAyS? p. 426 
6. As a result of behavioral changes and market adjustments, 
tax burdens are often not borne by those initially respon-
sible for paying them. When we speak of the incidence of a tax, 
we are referring to the ultimate distribution of its burden.
7. Taxes change behavior, and changes in behavior can affect 
supply and demand in markets, causing prices to change. 
When prices change in input markets or in output markets, 
some people may be made better off and some worse off. 
These final changes determine the ultimate burden of a tax.
8. Tax shifting occurs when households can alter their behavior 
and do something to avoid paying a tax. In general, broad-
based taxes are less likely to be shifted and more likely to 
stick where they are levied than partial taxes are.
9. When labor supply is more elastic, firms bear the bulk of a 
tax imposed on labor. When labor supply is more inelastic, 
workers bear the bulk of the tax burden. Because the elastic-
ity of labor supply in the United States is close to zero, most 
economists conclude that most of the payroll tax in the 
United States is probably borne by workers.
10. The payroll tax is regressive at top incomes for two  reasons. 
Wages and salaries fall as a percentage of total income as we 
move up the income scale. Those with higher incomes earn 
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 441 
a larger portion of their incomes from profits, dividends, 
rents, and so on, and these kinds of income are not subject 
to the payroll tax. The full tax is also not applied to very high 
incomes.
11. The ultimate burden of the corporate tax appears to depend 
on several factors. One generally accepted study shows that 
the owners of corporations, proprietorships, and partner-
ships all bear the burden of the corporate tax in rough 
proportion to profits, even though it is directly levied only 
on corporations, that wage effects are small, and that excise 
effects are roughly neutral. However, there is still much de-
bate about whom the corporate tax “hurts.” The burden of 
the corporate tax is progressive because profits and capital 
income make up a much bigger part of the incomes of the 
high-income households.
19.3 ExCESS BURDENS AND ThE PRINCIPlE  
Of NEUTRAlITy p. 431 
12. When taxes distort economic decisions, they impose 
 burdens that, in aggregate, exceed the revenue collected by 
the government. The amount by which the burden of a tax 
exceeds the revenue collected by the government is called 
the excess burden. The size of excess burdens depends on the 
degree to which economic decisions are changed by the 
tax. The principle of neutrality holds that the most efficient 
taxes are broad-based taxes that do not distort economic 
decisions.
13. The excess burden imposed by a tax is equal to the pretax 
consumer surplus minus the after-tax consumer surplus 
 minus the total taxes collected by the government.  
The more elastic the demand curve, the greater the 
 distortion caused by any given tax rate.
19.4 ThE PRINCIPlE Of SECOND BEST p. 432 
14. The principle of second best holds that a tax that distorts 
 economic decisions does not necessarily impose an excess 
burden. If previously existing distortions or externalities 
 exist, such a tax may actually improve efficiency
19.5 TAx EqUITy p. 434 
15. There is much disagreement over what constitutes a fair 
tax system. One theory contends that people should bear 
tax burdens in proportion to the benefits that they receive 
from government expenditures. This is the benefits-received 
principle. Another theory contends that people should bear 
tax burdens in line with their ability to pay. This ability-to-pay 
principle has dominated U.S. tax policy.
16. The three leading candidates for best tax base are income, 
consumption, and wealth.
19.6 SOCIAl ChOICE p. 437 
17. Because we cannot know everyone’s preferences about 
public goods, we are forced to rely on imperfect social choice 
mechanisms such as majority rule.
18. The theory that unfettered markets do not achieve an 
 efficient allocation of resources should not lead us to 
 conclude that government involvement necessarily leads to 
efficiency. Governments also can fail.
r E v I E W  T E r m S  a N d  C o N C E P T S 
ability-to-pay principle, p. 434 
average tax rate, p. 424 
benefits-received principle, p. 434 
estate, p. 436 
estate tax, p. 436 
excess burden, p. 431 
impossibility theorem, p. 437 
logrolling, p. 438 
marginal tax rate, p. 424 
principle of neutrality, p. 431 
principle of second best, p. 433 
progressive tax, p. 424 
proportional tax, p. 424 
regressive tax, p. 424 
social choice, p. 437 
tax base, p. 423 
tax incidence, p. 426 
tax rate structure,  p. 423 
tax shifting, p. 426 
voting paradox, p. 438 
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
P r o B l E m S 
Similar problems are available on MyEconLab .
19.1 ThE BASICS Of TAxATION
Learning Objective: Define the fundamentals of taxation.
 1.1 Suppose that in 2015, Congress passed and the presi-
dent signed a new simple income tax with a flat rate of 
20 percent on all income greater than $35,000 (no tax 
on the first $35,000). Assume that the tax is imposed 
on every individual separately. For each of the following 
total  income levels, calculate taxes due and compute the 
 average tax rate. Plot the average tax rate on a graph with 
income along the horizontal axis. Is the tax proportional, 
progressive, or regressive? Explain why.
a. $35,000
b. $50,000
c. $65,000
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
442 part III Market Imperfections and the Role of Government
d. $80,000
e. $100,000
f. $125,000
 1.2 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 425] Using 
the tax brackets and rates for 2014 on p. 425, compute 
the total tax for each of the following income levels for 
a single taxpayer. In each case, calculate average and 
marginal tax rates. Assume that in each case the taxpayer 
chooses the standard deduction and qualifies for a single 
exemption.
a. Gross income = $35,000
b. Gross income = $70,000
c. Gross income = $125,000
d. Gross income = $250,000
 1.3 In the United States, 43 states have passed legislation to 
legalize lotteries, and the states use the lottery proceeds 
to raise revenue. If you view the price of a lottery ticket as 
a tax, do you think it would be a proportional, progres-
sive, or regressive tax? What information would you need 
to definitively determine if it was proportional, progres-
sive, or regressive?
 1.4 Each year around April 15, discussions heat up regard-
ing the tax system in the United States. A number of 
people are in favor of replacing the current federal 
income tax with either a flat tax or a consumption tax. 
Explain whether the current federal income tax is pro-
portional, progressive, or regressive. Do the same for a 
flat tax and a consumption tax.
19.2 TAx INCIDENCE: WhO PAyS?
Learning Objective: Discuss the incidence of payroll taxes and 
corporate profits taxes.
 2.1 A citizens’ group in the Pacific Northwest has the follow-
ing statement in its charter:
■
■
“Our goal is to ensure that large, powerful corpora-
tions pay their fair share of taxes in this country.” 
To implement this goal, the group has recommended  
and lobbied for an increase in the corporation income  
tax and a reduction in the individual income tax. Would 
you support such a petition? Explain your logic.
 2.2 For each of the following statements, do you agree or 
 disagree? Why?
a. Economic theory predicts unequivocally that a payroll tax 
reduction will increase the supply of labor.
b. Corporate income taxes levied on a monopolist are likely 
to be regressive because the monopoly can pass on its 
burden to consumers.
c. If labor supply is relatively elastic, the burden of a payroll 
tax falls largely on workers.
 2.3 In calculating total faculty compensation, the adminis-
tration of Doughnut University includes payroll taxes 
(Social Security taxes) paid as a benefit to faculty. After all, 
those tax payments are earning future entitlements for 
the faculty under Social Security. However, the American 
Association of University Professors has argued that, far 
from being a benefit, the employer’s contribution is simply 
a tax and that its burden falls on the faculty even though it 
is paid by the university. Discuss both sides of this debate.
 2.4 The graph below represents equilibrium in a competitive 
labor market both before and after a payroll tax, which is 
levied on the employer, has been implemented. Before the 
payroll tax, the equilibrium quantity of labor was  
55 units. Supply curve S1 represents supply as a function 
of what firms pay, including the tax. S0 represents labor 
 supply as a function of what workers take home.
a. What is the amount of the per-unit payroll tax?
b. What is the per-unit price of labor faced by firms 
 immediately after the tax is levied?
c. What wage will workers receive immediately after the tax 
is levied?
d. What are the quantity of labor demanded and the quan-
tity of labor supplied immediately after the tax is levied?
e. If, after the tax is levied, the equilibrium quantity of labor 
settles at 40 units, what will be the new equilibrium wage?
f. If, after the tax is levied, the equilibrium quantity of labor 
settles at 40 units, what are the amounts of the workers’ 
share of the tax burden, the firms’ share of the tax burden, 
and the total tax collection?
0
40
55
24
28
Units of labor, L
Wage rate ($)
S0 (as a function of workers’
take-home pay)
D (as a function of
what ﬁrms pay)
16
30
20
S1 (as a function of
what ﬁrms pay)
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
Chapter 19  Public Finance: The Economics of Taxation 443 
 2.5 The market demand for product X is given by  
Qd = 6 - 1/2P and the market supply for good X is  
given by Qs = 2P -14, where P = price per unit.
a. Draw a supply-and-demand graph with these curves. 
What are the equilibrium price and the equilibrium 
quantity?
b. A per-unit excise tax is imposed on product X, and the 
market supply with the tax is now given by Qs = 2P - 19. 
Add this supply curve to your graph and identify the new 
equilibrium price and equilibrium quantity. What is the 
value of the per-unit tax? How much of this per-unit tax 
will be paid by consumers and how much will be paid by 
the producer?
19.3 ExCESS BURDENS AND ThE PRINCIPlE  
Of NEUTRAlITy
Learning Objective: Summarize the causes and effects of 
excess burdens.
 3.1 Taxes on necessities that have low demand elasticities im-
pose large excess burdens because consumers can’t avoid 
buying them. Do you agree or disagree with that state-
ment? Explain.
 3.2 You are given the following information on a proposed 
“cigar tax” in the Republic of Panatela. Panatela collects 
no other specific excise taxes, and all other government 
revenues come from a neutral lump-sum tax. (A  
lump-sum tax is a tax of a fixed sum paid by all  
people regardless of their circumstances.) Assume 
further that the burden of the tax is fully borne by 
consumers.
Now consider the following data:
■
■
Cigars consumed before the tax: 18 million
■
■
Cigars consumed after the tax: 14 million
■
■
Average price per cigar: $20 (not including  
the tax)
■
■
Tax rate: 25 percent
Estimate the size of the excess burden of the tax. 
What is the excess burden as a percentage of revenues 
collected from the tax?
 3.3 Assume that at a price of $12 per pound, the quantity  
of cashews demanded is 50 pounds. Now assume  
that the government imposes an excise tax on  
cashews of $3 per pound. Draw a graph showing  
demand when  consumers are relatively responsive  
to the tax and  quantity  demanded falls by 40 percent, 
and when  consumers are relatively nonresponsive  
to the tax and quantity  demanded falls by  
10 percent. Calculate the amount of the excess  
burden of this tax for each s ituation and show this  
on the graph.
19.4 ThE PRINCIPlE Of SECOND BEST
Learning Objective: Explain the principle of second best.
 4.1 For each of the following statements, do you agree or 
 disagree? Why?
a. Taxing for externalities causes distortions that always 
 result in excess burdens.
b. It is possible for a distorting tax to improve economic 
welfare.
c. An optimal system of excise taxes would impose the 
heaviest taxes on those goods with relatively elastic 
demands.
19.5 TAx EqUITy
Learning Objective: Explain what is meant by tax equity.
 5.1 Suppose a special tax was introduced that used the value 
of one’s automobile as the tax base. Each person would 
pay taxes equal to 10 percent of the value of his or her car. 
Would the tax be proportional, regressive, or progressive? 
What assumptions do you make in answering this ques-
tion? What distortions do you think would appear in the 
economy if such a tax were introduced?
19.6 SOCIAl ChOICE
Learning Objective: Discuss social choice theories and issues.
 6.1 Annie, Blake, and Cornelia are triplets who are trying 
to decide on a name for their new bakery. They have 
narrowed their decision down to three choices, and the 
preferences of each are listed in the table. Will their prefer-
ences lead to a voting paradox? If yes, explain why. If no, 
which company name will be selected?
Company Name
Annie
Blake
Cornelia
ABC Bakery
1st
3rd
2nd
Triple Threat
3rd
1st
3rd
Bake n’ Take
2nd
2nd
1st
 6.2 The town of Mt. Pilot has a 3-member town council that 
is considering new infrastructure projects for the town: 
building a new park, buying a new fire truck, and repav-
ing Main Street. The town only has enough money to pay 
for one of the projects. The preferences of each council 
member for each project are shown in the table. Will 
these preferences lead to a voting paradox? Explain your 
answer by using the results of the votes for each of the 
three head-to-head match-ups.
Company Name
Barney
floyd
howard
New Park
1st
2nd
3rd
New Fire Truck
3rd
1st
2nd
Repaving Main street
2nd
3rd
1st
444
When the macroeconomy is doing 
well, jobs are easy to find, incomes are 
generally rising, and profits of corpora-
tions are high. On the other hand, if the 
macroeconomy is in a slump, new jobs 
are scarce, incomes are not growing 
well, and profits are low. Students who 
entered the job market in the boom of 
the late 1990s in the United States, on 
average, had an easier time finding a 
job than did those who entered in the 
recession of 2008–2009. The sluggish 
economy that continued into 2013 had 
negative effects on millions of people. 
Given the large effect that the macroeconomy can have on our lives, it is important that we 
 understand how it works.
We begin by discussing the differences between microeconomics and macroeconomics that 
we glimpsed in Chapter 1. Microeconomics examines the functioning of individual  industries 
and the behavior of individual decision-making units, typically firms and  households. With 
a few assumptions about how these units behave (firms maximize profits; households maxi-
mize utility), we can derive useful conclusions about how markets work and how resources are 
allocated.
Instead of focusing on the factors that influence the production of particular products 
and the behavior of individual industries, macroeconomics focuses on the determinants of 
total national output. Macroeconomics studies not household income but national income, 
not  individual prices but the overall price level. It does not analyze the demand for labor in the 
 automobile industry but instead total employment in the economy.
Both microeconomics and macroeconomics are concerned with the decisions of house-
holds and firms. Microeconomics deals with individual decisions; macroeconomics deals with 
the sum of these individual decisions. Aggregate is used in macroeconomics to refer to sums. 
When we speak of aggregate behavior, we mean the behavior of all households as well as the 
behavior of all firms. We also speak of aggregate consumption and aggregate investment, which 
refer to total consumption and total investment in the economy, respectively.
Because microeconomists and macroeconomists look at the economy from different per-
spectives, you might expect that they would reach somewhat different conclusions about the 
way the economy behaves. This is true to some extent. Microeconomists generally conclude 
that markets work well. They see prices as flexible, adjusting to maintain equality between 
quantity supplied and quantity demanded. Macroeconomists, however, observe that important 
prices in the economy—for example, the wage rate (or price of labor)—often seem “sticky.” 
Sticky prices are prices that do not always adjust rapidly to maintain equality between quantity 
supplied and quantity demanded. Microeconomists do not expect to see the quantity of apples 
Chapter Outline 
and learning 
ObjeCtives 
20.1 Macroeconomic 
Concerns p. 445
Describe the three 
primary concerns of 
macroeconomics.
20.2 The 
Components of the 
Macroeconomy p. 448
Discuss the interac-
tion  between the four 
components of the 
macroeconomy.
20.3 A Brief History 
of Macroeconomics 
p. 451
Summarize the macroeco-
nomic history of the United 
States between 1929  
and 1970.
20.4 The U.S. 
Economy Since  
1970 p. 453
Describe the U.S. economy 
since 1970.
Introduction to 
Macroeconomics
Part IV 
ConCepts and problems in maCroeConomiCs
20 
