Chapter 20  Introduction to Macroeconomics 445 
supplied exceeding the quantity of apples demanded because the price of apples is not sticky. On 
the other hand, macroeconomists—who analyze aggregate behavior—examine periods of high 
unemployment, where the quantity of labor supplied appears to exceed the quantity of labor 
 demanded. At such times, it appears that wage rates do not fall fast enough to equate the quan-
tity of labor supplied and the quantity of labor demanded.
macroeconomic Concerns
Three of the major concerns of macroeconomics are
■
■Output growth
■
■Unemployment
■
■Inflation and deflation
Government policy makers would like to have high output growth, low unemployment, 
and low inflation. We will see that these goals may conflict with one another and that an impor-
tant point in understanding macroeconomics is understanding these conflicts.
output Growth
Instead of growing at an even rate at all times, economies tend to experience short-term ups and 
downs in their performance. The technical name for these ups and downs is the business cycle. 
The main measure of how an economy is doing is aggregate output, the total quantity of goods 
and services produced in the economy in a given period. When less is produced (in other words, 
when aggregate output decreases), there are fewer goods and services to go around and the aver-
age standard of living declines. When firms cut back on production, they also lay off workers, 
increasing the rate of unemployment.
Recessions are periods during which aggregate output declines. It has become conven-
tional to classify an economic downturn as a “recession” when aggregate output declines for 
two consecutive quarters. A prolonged and deep recession is called a depression, although 
economists do not agree on when a recession becomes a depression. Since the 1930s the United 
States has experienced one depression (during the 1930s) and eight recessions: 1946, 1954, 1958, 
1974–1975, 1980–1982, 1990–1991, 2001, and 2008–2009. Other countries also experienced 
recessions in the twentieth century, some roughly coinciding with U.S. recessions and some not.
A typical business cycle is illustrated in Figure 20.1. Because most economies, on average, 
grow over time, the business cycle in Figure 20.1 shows a positive trend—the peak (the highest 
point) of a new business cycle is higher than the peak of the previous cycle. The period from a 
20.1 Learning Objective
Describe the three primary 
concerns of macroeconomics.
microeconomics Examines 
the functioning of individual 
industries and the behavior 
of individual decision-making 
units—firms and households.
macroeconomics Deals 
with the economy as a whole. 
Macroeconomics focuses on the 
determinants of total national 
income, deals with aggregates 
such as aggregate consumption 
and investment, and looks at 
the overall level of prices instead 
of individual prices.
aggregate behavior The 
behavior of all households and 
firms together.
sticky prices Prices that do 
not always adjust rapidly to 
maintain equality between 
quantity supplied and quantity 
demanded.
business cycle The cycle of 
short-term ups and downs in 
the economy.
aggregate output The total 
quantity of goods and services 
produced in an economy in a 
given period.
recession A period dur-
ing which aggregate output 
declines. Conventionally, a 
period in which aggregate 
 output declines for two 
 consecutive quarters.
depression A prolonged and 
deep recession.
Time
Aggregate output
Trough
Trough
Trend
growth
Peak
Recession 
E
x
pa
ns
io
n 
A
B
▴
▴FiguRe 20.1 A Typical Business Cycle
In this business cycle, the economy is expanding as it moves through point A from the trough to the peak. 
When the economy moves from a peak down to a trough, through point B, the economy is in recession.
446 part IV Concepts and problems in macroeconomics 
trough, or bottom of the cycle, to a peak is called an expansion or a boom. During an expan-
sion, output and employment grow. The period from a peak to a trough is called a contraction, 
recession, or slump, when output and employment fall.
In judging whether an economy is expanding or contracting, note the difference between 
the level of economic activity and its rate of change. If the economy has just left a trough (point 
A in Figure 20.1), it will be growing (rate of change is positive), but its level of output will still 
be low. If the economy has just started to decline from a peak (point B), it will be contracting 
(rate of change is negative), but its level of output will still be high. The business cycle drawn 
in Figure 20.1 is symmetrical, which means that the length of an expansion is the same as the 
length of a contraction. Most business cycles are not symmetrical, however. It is possible, for 
example, for the expansion phase to be longer than the contraction phase. When contraction 
comes, it may be fast and sharp, whereas expansion may be slow and gradual. Moreover, the 
economy is not nearly as regular as the business cycle in Figure 20.1 indicates. The ups and 
downs in the economy tend to be erratic.
Figure 20.2 shows the actual business cycles in the United States between 1900 and 2014. 
Although many business cycles have occurred in the last 115 years, each is unique. The econ-
omy is not so simple that it has regular cycles.
The periods of the Great Depression and World War I and II show the largest fluctua-
tions in Figure 20.2, although other large contractions and expansions have taken place. Note 
the  expansion in the 1960s and the five recessions since 1970. Some of the cycles have been 
long; some have been short. Note also that aggregate output actually increased between 1933 
and 1937, even though it was still quite low in 1937. The economy did not come out of the 
Depression until the defense buildup prior to the start of World War II. Note also that business 
cycles were more extreme before World War II than they have been since then. Finally, note that 
the recovery from the 2008–2009 recession was unusually slow.
expansion or boom The 
period in the business cycle 
from a trough up to a peak 
during which output and 
employment grow.
contraction, recession, or 
slump The period in the busi-
ness cycle from a peak down to 
a trough during which output 
and employment fall.
1,000
300
11,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
1900
1910
1920
World
War I
World
War II
Korean
War
Roaring
Twenties
The Great
Depression
Vietnam
War
Recession
2001
First
oil shock
Second
oil shock
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2014
2010
Years
Aggregate output (real GDP) in billions of 2009 dollars
Recession
1974–1975
Recession
1980–1982
Recession
1990–1991
14,000
17,000
Recession
2008–2009
▴
▴FiguRe 20.2 u.S. Aggregate Output (Real gDP),  
1900–2014
The periods of the Great Depression and World War I and II show the largest fluctuations  
in aggregate  output.
MyEconLab Real-time data
Chapter 20  Introduction to Macroeconomics 447 
Unemployment
You cannot listen to the news or read a newspaper without noticing that data on the unemploy-
ment rate are released each month. The unemployment rate—the percentage of the labor force 
that is unemployed—is a key indicator of the economy’s health. Because the unemployment rate 
is usually closely related to the economy’s aggregate output, announcements of each month’s 
new figure are followed with great interest by economists, politicians, and policy makers.
Although macroeconomists are interested in learning why the unemployment rate has 
risen or fallen in a given period, they also try to answer a more basic question: Why is there any 
unemployment at all? Part of the answer to this question is straightforward, coming from the 
fact that adjustments in labor markets generally take some time. At times people decide to quit 
their jobs and look for something better. Until they find a new job, they will be unemployed. At 
any time, some firms may go bankrupt because of competition from rivals, bad management, 
or bad luck. Employees of such firms typically are not able to find new jobs immediately, and 
while they are looking for work, they will be unemployed. Also, workers entering the labor mar-
ket for the first time may require a few weeks or months to find a job. All of these factors tell us 
that some positive rate of unemployment is inevitable in a dynamic economy.
A key question in macroeconomics is how the economy adjusts when the unemploy-
ment rate rises beyond this base level. Supply and demand analysis leads us to expect a mar-
ket response to the existence of unemployed workers. Specifically, when there is unemploy-
ment beyond some minimum amount, there is an excess supply of workers—at the going 
wage rates, there are people who want to work who cannot find work. Microeconomic the-
ory tells us that excess supply causes a decrease in the price of the commodity in question. 
As prices fall, quantity demanded rises and the quantity supplied falls. In the end prices fall 
enough so that quantity supplied equals the quantity demanded, and equilibrium is restored 
as the market clears.
The existence of unemployment seems to imply that the aggregate labor market is not in 
equilibrium—that something prevents the quantity supplied and the quantity demanded from 
equating. Why do labor markets not clear when other markets do, or is it that labor markets are 
clearing and the unemployment data reflect something different? This is one of the ongoing 
debates in macroeconomics.
inflation and deflation
inflation is an increase in the overall price level. Keeping inflation low has long been a goal of 
government policy. Especially problematic are hyperinflations, or periods of very rapid increases 
in the overall price level.
Most Americans are unaware of what life is like under high inflation. In some countries 
at some times, people were accustomed to prices rising by the day, by the hour, or even by 
the minute. During the hyperinflation in Bolivia in 1984 and 1985, the price of one egg rose 
from 3,000 pesos to 10,000 pesos in 1 week. In 1985, three bottles of aspirin sold for the 
same price as a luxury car had sold for in 1982. At the same time, the problem of handling 
money became a burden. Bolivia’s currency, printed in West Germany and England, was the 
country’s third biggest import in 1984, surpassed only by wheat and mining equipment. In 
December 2014 the inflation rate in Venezuela reached 68 percent, and the country experi-
enced numerous street protests against the policies of the relatively new president, Nicolas 
Maduro. Very high inflation can destabilize economies and governments. Hyperinflations 
are rare. Nonetheless, economists have devoted much effort to identifying the costs and 
 consequences of even moderate inflation. Does anyone gain from inflation? Who loses? 
What costs does inflation impose on society? How severe are they? What causes infla-
tion? What is the best way to stop it? Here too we find debate. A decrease in the overall 
price level is called deflation. In some periods in U.S. history and recently in Japan, defla-
tion has occurred over an extended period of time. In 2015 the European Union began to 
take steps to fight what was seen as the early stages of deflation in that region. The goal of 
policy makers is to avoid prolonged periods of deflation as well as inflation to pursue the 
 macroeconomic goal of stability.
unemployment rate The 
 percentage of the labor force 
that is unemployed.
inflation An increase in the 
overall price level.
hyperinflation A period of 
very rapid increases in the over-
all price level.
deflation A decrease in the 
overall price level.
448 part IV Concepts and problems in macroeconomics 
the Components of the macroeconomy
Understanding how the macroeconomy works can be challenging because a great deal is going on 
at one time. Everything seems to affect everything else. To see the big picture, it is helpful to divide 
the participants in the economy into four broad groups: (1) households, (2) firms, (3) the government, 
and (4) the rest of the world. Households and firms make up the private sector, the government is 
the public sector, and the rest of the world is the foreign sector. These four groups interact in the 
economy in a variety of ways, many involving either receiving or paying income.
the Circular Flow diagram
A useful way of seeing the economic interactions among the four groups in the economy is a 
circular flow diagram, which shows the income received and payments made by each group. A 
simple circular flow diagram is pictured in Figure 20.3.
Let us walk through the circular flow step by step. Households work for firms and the 
government, and they receive wages for their work. Our diagram shows a flow of wages into 
households as payment for those services. Households also receive interest on corporate and 
government bonds and dividends from firms. Many households receive other payments from 
the government, such as Social Security benefits, veterans’ benefits, and welfare payments. 
Economists call these kinds of payments from the government (for which the recipients do not 
supply goods, services, or labor) transfer payments. Together, these receipts make up the total 
income received by the households.
Households buy goods and services from firms and pay taxes to the government. These 
items make up the total amount paid out by the households. The difference between the total 
receipts and the total payments of the households is the amount that the households save or 
dissave. If households receive more than they spend, they save during the period. If they receive 
20.2 Learning Objective
Discuss the interaction among 
the four components of the 
macroeconomy.
circular flow A diagram 
showing the flows in and out 
of the sectors in the economy.
transfer payments Cash pay-
ments made by the government 
to people who do not supply 
goods, services, or labor in 
exchange for these payments. 
They include Social Security 
benefits, veterans’ benefits, 
and welfare payments.
Households
Pu
rch
ase
s o
f d
om
est
ica
lly
ma
de
go
od
s a
nd
ser
vic
es
by
for
eig
ne
rs
(e
xp
or
ts
)
Firms
Government
Pu
rch
as
es
of
for
eig
n-
ma
de
Pu
rch
as
es
of
go
od
s a
nd
ser
vic
es
T
a
x
e
s
P
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
s
o
f
g
o
o
d
s
W
a
g
e
s
,
i
n
t
e
r
e
s
t
,
T
a
x
e
s
Wa
ge
s, i
nte
res
t, d
ivi
de
nd
s,
pro
fits
, a
nd
ren
t
go
od
s a
nd
se
rvi
ce
s (
im
po
rts
)
R
e
s
t
o
f
t
h
e
W
o
r
l
d
a
n
d
s
e
r
v
i
c
e
s
tr
a
n
s
f
e
r
p
a
y
m
e
n
t
s
▴
▸FiguRe 20.3 The 
Circular Flow of 
Payments
Households receive income 
from firms and the government, 
purchase goods and services 
from firms, and pay taxes to the 
government. They also purchase 
foreign-made goods and services 
(imports). Firms receive pay-
ments from households and the 
government for goods and ser-
vices; they pay wages, dividends, 
interest, and rents to households 
and taxes to the government. 
The government receives taxes 
from firms and households, pays 
firms and households for goods 
and services—including wages to 
government workers—and pays 
interest and transfers to house-
holds. Finally, people in other 
countries purchase goods and 
services produced domestically 
(exports).
Note: although not shown in this 
diagram, firms and governments 
also purchase imports.
Chapter 20  Introduction to Macroeconomics 449 
less than they spend, they dissave. A household can dissave by using up some of its previous 
 savings or by borrowing. In the circular flow diagram, household spending is shown as a flow 
out of households. Saving by households is sometimes termed a “leakage” from the circular flow 
because it withdraws income, or current purchasing power, from the system.
Firms sell goods and services to households and the government earning revenue, which 
shows up in the circular flow diagram as a flow into the firm sector. Firms pay wages, inter-
est, and dividends to households, and firms pay taxes to the government. These payments are 
shown flowing out of firms.
The government collects taxes from households and firms. The government also makes 
payments. It buys goods and services from firms, pays wages and interest to households, and 
makes transfer payments to households. If the government’s revenue is less than its payments, 
the government is dissaving.
Finally, households spend some of their income on imports—goods and services produced 
in the rest of the world. Similarly, people in foreign countries purchase exports—goods and 
 services produced by domestic firms and sold to other countries.
One lesson of the circular flow diagram is that everyone’s expenditure is someone else’s 
receipt. If you buy a personal computer from Dell, you make a payment to Dell, and Dell receives 
revenue. If Dell pays taxes to the government, it has made a payment and the government has 
received revenue. Everyone’s expenditures go somewhere. It is impossible to sell something 
without there being a buyer, and it is impossible to make a payment without there being a 
 recipient. Every transaction must have two sides.
the three market arenas
Another way of looking at the ways households, firms, the government, and the rest of the 
world relate to one another is to consider the markets in which they interact. We divide the mar-
kets into three broad arenas: (1) the goods-and-services market, (2) the labor market, and (3) the 
money (financial) market.
goods-and-Services Market 
Households and the government purchase goods and ser-
vices from firms in the goods-and-services market. In this market, firms also purchase goods and 
services from each other. For example, Levi Strauss buys denim from other firms to make its 
blue jeans. In addition, firms buy capital goods from other firms. If General Motors needs new 
robots on its assembly lines, it may buy them from another firm instead of making them. The 
Economics in Practice in Chapter 1 describes how Apple, in constructing its iPod, buys parts from 
a number of other firms.
Firms supply to the goods-and-services market. Households, the government, and firms 
demand from this market. Finally, the rest of the world buys from and sells to the goods-and- 
services market. The United States imports hundreds of billions of dollars’ worth of automo-
biles, DVDs, oil, and other goods. In the case of Apple’s iPod, inputs come from other firms 
located in countries all over the world. At the same time, the United States exports hundreds of 
billions of dollars’ worth of computers, airplanes, and agricultural goods.
Labor Market 
Interaction in the labor market takes place when firms and the government 
purchase labor from households. In this market, households supply labor and firms and the gov-
ernment demand labor. In the U.S. economy, firms are the largest demanders of labor, although 
the government is also a substantial employer. The total supply of labor in the economy depends 
on the sum of decisions made by households. Individuals must decide whether to enter the labor 
force (whether to look for a job at all) and how many hours to work.
Labor is also supplied to and demanded from the rest of the world. In recent years, the 
labor market has become an international market. For example, vegetable and fruit farmers 
in California would find it difficult to bring their product to market if it were not for the labor 
of migrant farm workers from Mexico. For years, Turkey has provided Germany with “guest 
workers” who are willing to take low-paying jobs that more prosperous German workers avoid. 
Call centers run by major U.S. corporations are sometimes staffed by labor in India and other 
 developing countries.
450 part IV Concepts and problems in macroeconomics 
Money Market 
In the money market—sometimes called the financial market—households 
purchase stocks and bonds from firms. Households supply funds to this market in the expecta-
tion of earning income in the form of dividends on stocks and interest on bonds. Households 
also demand (borrow) funds from this market to finance various purchases. Firms borrow to 
build new facilities in the hope of earning more in the future. The government borrows by issu-
ing bonds to fund public programs. Much of the borrowing and lending of households, firms, 
the government, and the rest of the world are coordinated by financial institutions—commer-
cial banks, savings and loan associations, insurance companies, and the like. These institutions 
take deposits from one group and lend them to others, often moving funds from one part of the 
world to another.
When a firm, a household, or the government borrows to finance a purchase, it has an obligation 
to pay that loan back, usually at some specified time in the future. Most loans also involve  payment 
of interest as a fee for the use of the borrowed funds. When a loan is made, the borrower usually 
signs a “promise to repay,” or promissory note, and gives it to the lender. When the federal  government 
 borrows, it issues “promises” called Treasury bonds, notes, or bills in exchange for money. Firms can 
borrow from banks, or in the case of corporations, they can issue corporate bonds.
Instead of issuing bonds to raise funds, corporations can also issue shares of stock. A share 
of stock  is a financial instrument that gives the holder a share in the firm’s ownership and there-
fore the right to share in the firm’s profits. If the firm does well, the value of the stock increases 
and the stockholder receives a capital gain1 on the initial purchase. In addition, the stock may pay 
dividends—that is, the firm may return some of its profits directly to its stockholders instead of 
retaining the profits to buy capital. If the firm does poorly, so does the stockholder. The capital 
value of the stock may fall, and dividends may not be paid. Stocks are traded in exchanges in 
many parts of the world, with the largest exchanges located in New York, London, and Tokyo.
Stocks and bonds are simply contracts, or agreements, between parties. I agree to loan you 
a certain amount, and you agree to repay me this amount plus something extra at some future 
date, or I agree to buy part ownership in your firm, and you agree to give me a share of the firm’s 
future profits.
A critical variable in the money market is the interest rate. Although we sometimes talk as if 
there is only one interest rate, there is never just one interest rate at any time. Instead, the interest 
rate on a given loan reflects the length of the loan and the perceived risk to the lender. A business 
that is just getting started must pay a higher rate than General Motors pays. A 30-year mortgage 
has a different interest rate than a 90-day loan. Nevertheless, interest rates tend to move up and 
down together, and their movement reflects general conditions in the financial market.
the role of the Government in the macroeconomy
The government plays a major role in the macroeconomy, so a useful way of learning how the 
macroeconomy works is to consider how the government uses policy to affect the economy. 
The two main policy instruments of the government are (1) fiscal policy and (2) monetary pol-
icy. Much of the study of macroeconomics is learning how fiscal and monetary policies work.
Fiscal policy refers to the government’s decisions about how much to tax and spend. The 
federal government collects taxes from households and firms and spends those funds on goods 
and services ranging from missiles to parks to social security payments to interstate highways. 
Taxes take the form of personal income taxes, social security taxes, and corporate profits taxes, 
among others. An expansionary fiscal policy is a policy in which taxes are cut or government 
spending increases. A contractionary fiscal policy is the reverse.
Monetary policy in the United States is conducted by the Federal Reserve, the nation’s 
central bank. The Fed, as it is usually called, controls short-term interest rates in the economy. 
The Fed’s decisions have important effects on the economy. In fact, the task of trying to smooth 
out business cycles in the United States has historically been left to the Fed (that is, to monetary 
Treasury bonds, notes, or 
bills Promissory notes issued 
by the federal government 
when it borrows money.
corporate bonds Promissory 
notes issued by corporations 
when they borrow money.
shares of stock Financial 
instruments that give to the 
holder a share in the firm’s 
ownership and therefore the 
right to share in the firm’s 
profits.
1 A capital gain occurs whenever the value of an asset increases. If you bought a stock for $1,000 and it is now worth $1,500, you 
have earned a capital gain of $500. A capital gain is “realized” when you sell the asset. Until you sell, the capital gain is accrued 
but not realized.
dividends The portion of 
a firm’s profits that the firm 
pays out each period to its 
shareholders.
fiscal policy Government 
policies concerning taxes and 
spending.
monetary policy The tools 
used by the Federal Reserve 
to control short term interest 
rates.
Chapter 20  Introduction to Macroeconomics 451 
policy). The chair of the Federal Reserve, currently Janet Yellen, is sometimes said to be the 
second-most powerful person in the United States after the president. As we will see later in 
the text, the Fed played a more active role in the 2008–2009 recession than it had in previous 
 recessions. Fiscal policy, however, also played an active role in the 2008–2009 recession and its 
aftermath.
a brief History of macroeconomics
The severe economic contraction and high unemployment of the 1930s, the decade of the 
great Depression, spurred a great deal of thinking about macroeconomic issues, especially 
 unemployment. Figure 20.2 shows that this period had the largest and longest aggregate output 
contraction in the twentieth century in the United States. The 1920s had been prosperous years 
for the U.S. economy. Virtually everyone who wanted a job could get one, incomes rose substan-
tially, and prices were stable. Beginning in late 1929, things took a sudden turn for the worse. In 
1929, 1.5 million people were unemployed. By 1933, that had increased to 13 million out of a 
labor force of 51 million. In 1933, the United States produced about 27 percent fewer goods 
and services than it had in 1929. In October 1929, when stock prices collapsed on Wall Street, 
 billions of dollars of personal wealth were lost. Unemployment remained above 14 percent of 
the labor force until 1940. (See the Economics in Practice, p. 452, “Macroeconomics in Literature,” 
for Fitzgerald’s and Steinbeck’s take on the 1920s and 1930s.)
Before the Great Depression, economists applied microeconomic models, sometimes 
referred to as “classical” or “market clearing” models, to economy-wide problems. As we sug-
gested, classical supply and demand analysis assumed that an excess supply of labor would 
drive down wages to a new equilibrium level. The decline in the wage rate would in turn raise 
the quantity of labor demanded by firms, erasing the unemployment. The prediction was clear: 
unemployment could not persist. But, during the Great Depression, unemployment levels 
remained high for nearly 10 years. In large measure, the failure of simple classical models to 
explain the prolonged existence of high unemployment provided the impetus for the develop-
ment of macroeconomics. It is not surprising that what we now call macroeconomics was born 
in the 1930s.
One of the most important works in the history of economics, The General Theory of Employment, 
Interest and Money, by John Maynard Keynes, was published in 1936. Building on what was already 
understood about markets and their behavior, Keynes set out to construct a theory that would 
explain the confusing economic events of his time.
Much of macroeconomics has roots in Keynes’s work. According to Keynes, it is not prices 
and wages alone that determine the level of employment, as classical models had suggested, but 
that the level of aggregate demand (sometimes called “total spending”) for goods and services 
also plays a role. Moreover, Keynes believed that governments could intervene in the economy 
and affect the level of output and employment. When private demand is low, Keynes argued, 
governments could stimulate aggregate demand and, by so doing, lift the economy out of 
recession. (Keynes was a larger-than-life figure, one of the Bloomsbury group in England that 
included, among others, Virginia Woolf and Clive Bell.)
After World War II and especially in the 1950s, Keynes’s views began to gain increasing 
influence over both professional economists and government policy makers. Governments 
came to believe that they could intervene in their economies to attain specific employment and 
output goals. They began to use their powers to tax and spend as well as their ability to affect 
interest rates and the money supply for the explicit purpose of controlling the economy’s level 
of spending and therefore its ups and downs. This view of government policy became firmly 
established in the United States with the passage of the Employment Act of 1946. This act estab-
lished the President’s Council of Economic Advisers, a group of economists who advise the 
president on economic issues. The act also committed the federal government to intervening in 
the economy to prevent large declines in output and employment.
The notion that the government could and should act to stabilize the macroeconomy 
reached the height of its popularity in the 1960s. During these years, Walter Heller, the chair-
man of the Council of Economic Advisers under both President John Kennedy and President 
Lyndon B. Johnson, alluded to fine-tuning as the government’s role in regulating inflation and 
20.3 Learning Objective
Summarize the macroeconomic 
history of the United States 
 between 1929 and 1970.
great Depression The period 
of severe economic contraction 
and high unemployment that 
began in 1929 and continued 
throughout the 1930s.
fine-tuning The phrase used 
by Walter Heller to refer to the 
government’s role in regulating 
inflation and unemployment.
452 part IV Concepts and problems in macroeconomics 
unemployment. During the 1960s, many economists believed the government could use the 
tools available to manipulate unemployment and inflation levels fairly precisely.
The optimism about the government’s ability to finely manage the economy was short-
lived. In the 1970s and early 1980s, the U.S. economy had wide fluctuations in employment, 
 output, and inflation. In 1974–1975 and again in 1980–1982, the United States experienced 
a severe recession. Although not as catastrophic as the Great Depression of the 1930s, these 
two recessions left millions without jobs and resulted in billions of dollars of lost output 
and income. In 1974–1975 and again in 1979–1981, the United States also saw high rates of 
inflation.
The 1970s was thus a period of stagnation and high inflation, which came to be called 
stagflation. Stagflation is defined as a situation in which there is high inflation at the same time 
stagflation A situation of 
both high inflation and high 
unemployment.
E co no m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
Macroeconomics in Literature
As you know, the language of economics includes a heavy 
dose of graphs and equations. But the underlying phenom-
ena that economists study are the stuff of novels as well as 
graphs and equations. The following two passages, from The 
Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald and The Grapes of Wrath by 
John Steinbeck, capture in graphic, although not graphical, 
form the economic growth and spending of the Roaring 
Twenties and the human side of the unemployment of the 
Great Depression. The Great Gatsby, written in 1925, is set 
in the 1920s, whereas The Grapes of Wrath, written in 1939, 
is set in the early 1930s. If you look at Figure 20.2 for these 
two periods, you will see the translation of Fitzgerald and 
Steinbeck into macroeconomics.
From The Great Gatsby
At least once a 
fortnight a corps 
of caterers came 
down with sev-
eral hundred feet 
of canvas and 
enough colored 
lights to make a 
Christmas 
tree 
of Gatsby’s enor-
mous 
garden. 
On buffet tables, 
garnished with glistening hors d’œuvre, spiced baked hams 
crowded against salads of harlequin designs and pastry pigs 
and turkeys bewitched to a dark gold. In the main hall a bar 
with a real brass rail was set up, and stocked with gins and 
liquors and with cordials so long forgotten that most of his 
female guests were too young to know one from another.
By seven o’clock the orchestra has arrived—no thin five 
piece affair but a whole pit full of oboes and trombones 
and saxophones and viols and cornets and piccolos and low 
and high drums. The last swimmers have come in from the 
beach now and are dressing upstairs; the cars from New York 
THInkInG PRACTICAlly
1. As we indicate in the introduction to this chapter, 
macroeconomics focuses on three concerns. Which 
of these concerns is covered in The Grapes of Wrath 
excerpt?
2. What economics textbook is featured in The Great 
Gatsby?
Hint: Go to fairmodel.econ.yale.edu/rayfair/pdf 
/2000c.pdf.
Source: From The Grapes of Wrath by John Steinbeck, copyright 1939, renewed  
© 1967 by John Steinbeck. Used by permission of Viking Penguin, a division 
of Penguin Group (USa) Inc. and Penguin Group (UK) Ltd.
are parked five deep in the drive, and already the halls and 
salons and verandas are gaudy with primary colors and hair 
shorn in strange new ways and shawls beyond the dreams of 
Castile.
From The Grapes of Wrath
The 
moving, 
questing people 
were 
migrants 
now. Those fami-
lies who had lived 
on a little piece 
of land, who had 
lived and died on 
forty acres, had 
eaten or starved 
on the produce 
of 
forty 
acres, 
had now the whole West to rove in. And they scampered 
about, looking for work; and the highways were streams of 
people, and the ditch banks were lines of people. Behind them 
more were coming. The great highways streamed with moving 
people.
Chapter 20  Introduction to Macroeconomics 453 
there are slow or negative output growth and high unemployment. Until the 1970s, high infla-
tion had been observed only in periods when the economy was prospering and unemployment 
was low. The problem of stagflation was vexing both for macroeconomic theorists and policy 
makers concerned with the health of the economy.
It was clear by 1975 that the macroeconomy was more difficult to control than Heller’s 
words or textbook theory had led economists to believe. The events of the 1970s and early 
1980s had an important influence on macroeconomic theory. Much of the faith in the simple 
Keynesian model and the “conventional wisdom” of the 1960s was lost. Although we are now 
45 years past the 1970s, the discipline of macroeconomics is still in flux and there is no agreed-
upon view of how the macroeconomy works. Many important issues have yet to be resolved. 
This makes macroeconomics hard to teach but exciting to study.
the U.s. economy since 1970
In the following chapters, it will be useful to have a picture of how the U.S. economy has per-
formed recently. Since 1970, the U.S. economy has experienced five recessions and two periods 
of high inflation. The period since 1970 is illustrated in Figures 20.4, 20.5, and 20.6. These fig-
ures are based on quarterly data (that is, data for each quarter of the year). The first quarter con-
sists of January, February, and March; the second quarter consists of April, May, and June; and so 
on. The Roman numerals I, II, III, and IV denote the four quarters. For example, 1972 III refers to 
the third quarter of 1972.
Figure 20.4 plots aggregate output for 1970 I–2014 IV. The five recessionary periods are 
1974 I–1975 I, 1980 II–1982 IV, 1990 III–1991 I, 2001 I–2001 III, and 2008 I–2009 II.2 These five 
periods are shaded in the figure. Figure 20.5 plots the unemployment rate for the same overall 
period with the same shading for the recessionary periods. Note that unemployment rose in all 
20.4 Learning Objective
Describe the U.S. economy 
since 1970.
2 Regarding the 1980 II–1982 IV period, output rose in 1980 IV and 1981 I before falling again in 1981 II. Given this fact, one 
possibility would be to treat the 1980 II–1982 IV period as if it included two separate recessionary periods: 1980 II–1980 III and 
1981 I–1982 IV. Because the expansion was so short-lived, however, we have chosen not to separate the period into two parts. 
These periods are close to but are not exactly the recessionary periods defined by the National Bureau of Economic Research 
(NBER). The NBER is considered the “official” decider of recessionary periods. One problem with the NBER definitions is 
that they are never revised, but the macro data are, sometimes by large amounts. This means that the NBER periods are not 
always those that would be chosen using the latest revised data. In November 2008 the NBER declared that a recession began in 
December 2007. In September 2010 it declared that the recession ended in June 2009.
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
8,000
9,000
10,000
11,000
12,000
13,000
14,000
15,000
16,000
17,000
1970 I
1975 I
1980 I
1985 I
1990 I
1995 I
2000 I
2005 I
2010 I
2014 IV
—Recessionary period
(1980 II–1982 IV)
—Recessionary
    period
    (1974 I– 
    1975 I)
Recessionary period—
(1990 III–1991 I)
Recessionary period—
(2001 I–2001 III)
Recessionary period—
(2008 I–2009 II)
Quarters
Aggregate output (real GDP) in billions of 2009 dollars
▴
▴FiguRe 20.4 Aggregate Output (Real gDP), 1970 i–2014 iV 
MyEconLab Real-time data
Aggregate output in the United States since 1970 has risen overall, but there have been five recessionary  
 periods: 1974 I–1975 I, 1980 II–1982 IV, 1990 III–1991 I, 2001 I–2001 III, and 2008 I–2009 II.
454 part IV Concepts and problems in macroeconomics 
five recessions. In the 1974–1975 recession, the unemployment rate reached a maximum of 8.8 
percent in the second quarter of 1975. During the 1980–1982 recession, it reached a maximum 
of 10.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 1982. The unemployment rate continued to rise after 
the 1990–1991 recession and reached a peak of 7.6 percent in the third quarter of 1992. In the 
2008-2009 recession it reached a peak of 9.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2009. By 2015 the 
unemployment rate was 5.5 percent.
Figure 20.6 plots the inflation rate for 1970 I–2014 IV. The two high inflation periods are 
1973 IV–1975 IV and 1979 I–1981 IV, which are shaded. In the first high inflation period, the 
inflation rate peaked at 11.1 percent in the first quarter of 1975. In the second high inflation 
period, inflation peaked at 10.2 percent in the first quarter of 1981. Since 1983, the inflation rate 
has been quite low by the standards of the 1970s. Since 1992, it has been between about 1 and 3 
percent.
In the following chapters, we will explain the behavior of and the connections among vari-
ables such as output, unemployment, and inflation. When you understand the forces at work in 
creating the movements shown in Figures 20.4, 20.5, and 20.6, you will have come a long way in 
understanding how the macroeconomy works.
—Recessionary period
(1980 II–1982 IV)
—Recessionary 
    period
    (1974 I– 
    1975 I)
Recessionary period—
(1990 III–1991 I)
Recessionary period—
(2001 I–2001 III)
Recessionary period—
(2008 I–2009 II)
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1970 I
1975 I
1980 I
1985 I
1990 I
1995 I
2000 I
2005 I
2010 I
2014 IV
Unemployment rate (percentage points)
Quarters
▴
▴FiguRe 20.5 unemployment Rate, 1970 i–2014 iV
The U.S. unemployment rate since 1970 shows wide variations. The five recessionary reference  
periods show increases in the unemployment rate.
MyEconLab Real-time data
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1970 I
1975 I
1980 I
1985 I
1990 I
1995 I
2000 I
2005 I
2010 I
2014 IV
Inflation rate (percentage change in the
GDP deflator, four-quarter average)
Quarters
High
inflation
period
(1973 IV
–1975 IV)
High
inflation
period
(1979 I– 
1981 IV)
––
––
▴
▴FiguRe 20.6 inflation Rate (Percentage Change  
in the gDP Deflator,  Four-Quarter Average), 1970 i–2014 iV
Since 1970, inflation has been high in two periods: 1973 IV–1975 IV and 1979 I–1981 IV. Inflation between 
1983 and 1992 was moderate. Since 1992, it has been fairly low.
MyEconLab Real-time data
Chapter 20  Introduction to Macroeconomics 455 
S U M M A r y 
1. Microeconomics examines the functioning of individual indus-
tries and the behavior of individual decision-making units. 
Macroeconomics is concerned with the sum, or aggregate, of 
these individual decisions—the consumption of all house-
holds in the economy, the amount of labor supplied and 
demanded by all individuals and firms, and the total amount 
of all goods and services produced.
20.1 maCroeConomiC ConCerns p. 445 
2. The three topics of primary concern to macroeconomists 
are the growth rate of aggregate output, the level of unem-
ployment, and increases in the overall price level, or inflation.
20.2 tHe Components oF tHe 
maCroeConomy p. 448 
3. The circular flow diagram shows the flow of income received 
and payments made by the four groups in the economy—
households, firms, the government, and the rest of the 
world. Everybody’s expenditure is someone else’s receipt—
every transaction must have two sides.
4. Another way of looking at how households, firms, the 
government, and the rest of the world relate is to consider 
the markets in which they interact: the goods-and-services 
 market, labor market, and money (financial) market.
5. Among the tools that the government has available for influ-
encing the macroeconomy are fiscal policy (decisions on taxes 
and government spending) and monetary policy (control of 
short term interest rates).
20.3 a brieF History oF maCroeConomiCs p. 451 
6. Macroeconomics was born out of the effort to explain 
the Great Depression of the 1930s. Since that time, the dis-
cipline has evolved, concerning itself with new issues as 
the problems facing the economy have changed. Through 
the late 1960s, it was believed that the government could 
fine-tune the economy to keep it running on an even 
keel at all times. The poor economic performance of the 
1970s, however, showed that fine-tuning does not always 
work.
20.4 tHe U.s. eConomy sinCe 1970 p. 453 
7. Since 1970, the U.S. economy has seen five recessions and two 
periods of high inflation.
r E v I E w  T E r M S  A n d  C o n C E p T S 
aggregate behavior, p. 444 
aggregate output, p. 445 
business cycle, p. 445 
circular flow, p. 448 
contraction, recession, or slump, p. 446 
corporate bonds, p. 450 
deflation, p. 447 
depression, p. 445 
dividends, p. 450 
expansion or boom, p. 446 
fine-tuning, p. 451 
fiscal policy, p. 450 
Great Depression, p. 451 
hyperinflation, p. 447 
inflation, p. 447 
macroeconomics, p. 444 
microeconomics, p. 444 
monetary policy, p. 450 
recession, p. 445 
shares of stock, p. 450 
stagflation, p. 452 
sticky prices, p. 444 
transfer payments, p. 448 
Treasury bonds, notes, or bills, p. 450 
unemployment rate, p. 447 
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
p r o B l E M S 
Similar problems are available on MyEconLab .
20.1 maCroeConomiC ConCerns
Learning Objective: Describe the three primary concerns of 
macroeconomics.
 1.1 Define inflation. Assume that you live in a simple econ-
omy in which only three goods are produced and traded: 
cashews, pecans, and almonds. Suppose that on January 
1, 2015, cashews sold for $12.50 per pound, pecans were 
$4.00 per pound, and almonds were $5.50 per pound. At 
the end of the year, you discover that the cashew crop was 
lower than expected and that cashew prices had increased 
to $17.00 per pound, but pecan prices stayed at $4.00 and 
almond prices had actually fallen to $3.00. Can you say 
what happened to the overall “price level”? How might 
you construct a measure of the “change in the price level”? 
What additional information might you need to construct 
your measure?
 1.2 Define unemployment. Should everyone who does not hold 
a job be considered “unemployed”? To help with your 
answer, draw a supply and demand diagram depicting the 
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
456 part IV Concepts and problems in macroeconomics 
labor market. What is measured along the demand curve? 
What factors determine the quantity of labor demanded 
during a given period? What is measured along the labor 
supply curve? What factors determine the quantity of la-
bor supplied by households during a given period? What 
is the opportunity cost of holding a job?
 1.3 According to Eurostat, the European Union (EU) statisti-
cal office, the unemployment rate in the EU (composed 
of 28 countries) has steadily increased in the years follow-
ing the 2007–08 global financial crisis, from a low of 7 
percent in 2007 to a peak of 10.9 percent in 2013, with a 
small reversal in 2014. Yet the average growth rate in the 
EU 28 countries has followed a much less regular path, 
decreasing from a peak of 3.1 percent in 2007 to a low 
of -4.4 percent in 2009 (a recessionary year), returning 
positive in 2010 and 2011 (respectively, 2.1 percent and 
1.7 percent), but turning negative again in 2012 (-0.5 
percent), then slightly positive in 2013 (0.2 percent) and 
slightly accelerating in 2014 (1.4 percent). How can you 
explain these contrasting trends?
 1.4 Describe the state of the economy in the country where 
you live, both in dynamic terms—comparing this year with 
the last few years—and in comparative terms, with other 
countries of a similar income category. Is economic growth 
strong or weak? Is unemployment high or low? Is inflation 
excessive or not? How have economic growth, unemploy-
ment and inflation evolved over the past few years?
 1.5 Explain briefly how macroeconomics is different from 
microeconomics. How can macroeconomists use micro-
economic theory to guide them in their work, and why 
might they want to do so?
 1.6 A 2001 study by Berndt and Rappaport found that 
between 1976 and 1999, the average price of desktop 
computers in the United States had declined such that 
the 1999 price was only 0.069 percent of the 1976 price – 
a 1,445-fold decrease over a twenty-three year period. 
Does this imply that U.S. consumers’ purchasing power 
has increased 1,445 times during the same period? What 
do increases or decreases in individual goods’ price levels 
tell us about inflation? About consumers’ purchasing 
power?
20.2 tHe Components oF tHe 
maCroeConomy
Learning Objective: Discuss the interaction between the four 
components of the macroeconomy.
 2.1 Several member states of the European Union have 
 adopted, since 2009–10, contractionary fiscal policy 
 measures consisting of cuts in government spending 
and increases in taxation. These policies, often dubbed 
 “austerity” policies by their opponents, have led the 
latter to question their opportunity in a context of slow 
 economic growth and high unemployment. Why?
 2.2 In which market arenas can each of the following goods 
and services be traded?
a. A government bond.
b. A haircut at your local hairdresser.
c. Your skills as an economist.
d. A pair of second-hand shoes at the local market.
e. The average goals scored by a famous soccer player.
f. An insurance contract for your car.
20.3 a brieF History oF maCroeConomiCs
Learning Objective: Summarize the macroeconomic history of 
the United States between 1929 and 1970.
 3.1 Many of the expansionary periods during the twentieth 
century occurred during wars. Why do you think this is 
true?
 3.2 John Maynard Keynes was the first to show that govern-
ment policy could be used to change aggregate output 
and prevent recession by stabilizing the economy. 
Describe the economy of the world at the time Keynes 
was writing. Describe the economy of the United States 
today. What measures are being proposed by poten-
tial presidential candidates for the election of 2016 
to stimulate growth in the economy? Do any of these 
proposed policies follow the policies proposed by John 
Maynard Keynes? If so, which policies and from which 
candidates?
 3.3 Assume that the demand for flight attendants increases 
significantly as a result of an increase in demand for air 
travel. Explain what will happen to unemployment using 
both classical and Keynesian reasoning.
 3.4 Explain why the length and severity of the Great 
Depression necessitated a fundamental rethinking of 
the operations of the macroeconomy.
20.4 tHe U.s. eConomy sinCe 1970
Learning Objective: Describe the U.S. Economy Since 1970.
 4.1 The Economics in Practice describes prosperity and 
 recession as they are depicted in literature. Looking at 
data on GDP growth released by the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development in its Interim 
Economic Outlook (available at http://www.oecd.org/
eco/outlook/economicoutlook.htm), how would you 
compare the economic performance of “emerging 
 markets” such as Brazil, China and Russia with respect 
to advanced  industrial economies such as Germany, the 
United Kingdom and the United States over the past year 
or two? Are these economies expanding or shrinking?
457 
21 
We saw in the last chapter that macroeconomics is concerned with aggregate output, 
 unemployment, and inflation. In this chapter, we discuss the measurement of aggregate output 
and inflation. In the next chapter, we discuss the measurement of unemployment. Accurate 
measures of these variables are critical for understanding the economy. Without good measures, 
economists would have a hard time analyzing how the economy works and policy makers would 
have little to guide them on which policies are best for the economy.
Much of the macroeconomic data we use come from the national income and product 
 accounts, which are compiled by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the U.S. Department 
of Commerce. It is hard to overestimate the importance of these accounts. They are, in fact, 
one of the great inventions of the twentieth century. (See the Economics in Practice, p. 466.) They 
not only convey data about the performance of the economy but also provide a conceptual 
 framework that macroeconomists use to think about how the pieces of the economy fit together. 
When economists think about the macroeconomy, the categories and vocabulary they use come 
from the national income and product accounts.
The national income and product accounts can be compared with the mechanical or  wiring 
diagrams for an automobile engine. The diagrams do not explain how an engine works, but 
they identify the key parts of an engine and show how they are connected. Trying to understand 
the macroeconomy without understanding national income accounting is like trying to fix an 
 engine without a mechanical diagram and with no names for the engine parts.
Measuring National 
Output and National 
Income
Chapter Outline 
and learning 
ObjeCtives 
21.1 Gross Domestic 
Product p. 458
Describe GDP funda-
mentals and differentiate 
 between GDP and GNP.
21.2 Calculating 
GDP p. 460
Explain two methods for 
calculating GDP.
21.3 Nominal versus 
Real GDP p. 465
Discuss the difference 
 between real GDP and 
nominal GDP.
21.4 Limitations of 
the GDP Concept  
p. 470
Discuss the limitations 
of using GDP to measure 
well-being.
Looking Ahead p. 472
458 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
There are literally thousands of variables in the national income and product accounts. In 
this chapter, we discuss only the most important. This chapter is meant to convey the way the 
national income and product accounts represent or organize the economy and the sizes of the 
various pieces of the economy.
Gross Domestic Product
The key concept in the national income and product accounts is gross domestic product (GDP).
national income and product 
accounts Data collected and 
published by the government 
describing the various compo-
nents of national income and 
output in the economy.
21.1 Learning Objective
Describe GDP fundamentals 
and differentiate between  
GDP and GNP.
gross domestic product 
(GDP) The total market 
value of all final goods and 
 services produced within a 
given period by factors of 
 production located within  
a country.
Table 21.1  Value added in the Production of a Gallon  
of Gasoline (Hypothetical Numbers)
Stage of Production
Value of Sales
Value Added
(1) Oil drilling
$3.00
$3.00
(2) Refining
 3.30
 0.30
(3) Shipping
 3.60
 0.30
(4) Retail sale
 4.00
 0.40
Total value added
$4.00
GDP is the total market value of a country’s output. It is the market value of all final goods 
and services produced within a given period of time by factors of production located 
within a country.
U.S. GDP for 2014—the value of all output produced by factors of production in the United 
States in 2014—was $17,418.9 billion.
GDP is a critical concept. Just as an individual firm needs to evaluate the success or failure 
of its operations each year, so the economy as a whole needs to assess itself. GDP, as a measure of 
the total production of an economy, provides us with a country’s economic report card. Because 
GDP is so important, we need to take time to explain exactly what its definition means.
Final Goods and Services
First, note that the definition refers to final goods and services. Many goods produced in the 
economy are not classified as final goods, but instead as intermediate goods. Intermediate goods 
are produced by one firm for use in further processing or for resale by another firm. For example, 
tires sold to automobile manufacturers are intermediate goods. The chips that go in Apple’s 
iPhone are also intermediate goods. The value of intermediate goods is not counted in GDP.
Why are intermediate goods not counted in GDP? Suppose that in producing a car, General 
Motors (GM) pays $200 to Goodyear for tires. GM uses these tires (among other components) 
to assemble a car, which it sells for $24,000. The value of the car (including its tires) is $24,000, 
not $24,000 + $200. The final price of the car already reflects the value of all its components. 
To count in GDP both the value of the tires sold to the automobile manufacturers and the value 
of the automobiles sold to the consumers would result in double counting. It would also lead us 
to conclude that a decision by GM to produce its own tires rather than buy them from Goodyear 
leads to a reduction in the value of goods produced by the economy.
Double counting can also be avoided by counting only the value added to a product by each 
firm in its production process. The value added during some stage of production is the differ-
ence between the value of goods as they leave that stage of production and the cost of the goods 
as they entered that stage. Value added is illustrated in Table 21.1. The four stages of the produc-
tion of a gallon of gasoline are: (1) oil drilling, (2) refining, (3) shipping, and (4) retail sale. In the 
first stage, value added is the value of the crude oil. In the second stage, the refiner purchases 
the oil from the driller, refines it into gasoline, and sells it to the shipper. The refiner pays the 
driller $3.00 per gallon and charges the shipper $3.30. The value added by the refiner is thus 
final goods and services  
Goods and services produced 
for final use.
intermediate goods Goods 
that are produced by one firm 
for use in further processing or 
for resale by another firm.
value added The difference 
between the value of goods as 
they leave a stage of produc-
tion and the cost of the goods 
as they entered that stage.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 459 
$0.30 per gallon. The shipper then sells the gasoline to retailers for $3.60. The value added in the 
third stage of production is $0.30. Finally, the retailer sells the gasoline to consumers for $4.00. 
The value added at the fourth stage is $0.40, and the total value added in the production process 
is $4.00, the same as the value of sales at the retail level. Adding the total values of sales at each 
stage of production ($3.00 + $3.30 + $3.60 + $4.00 = $13.90) would significantly overesti-
mate the value of the gallon of gasoline.
In calculating GDP, we can sum up the value added at each stage of production or we 
can take the value of final sales. We do not use the value of total sales in an economy to 
 measure how much output has been produced.
Exclusion of Used Goods and Paper Transactions
GDP is concerned only with new, or current, production. Old output is not counted in current 
GDP because it was already counted when it was produced. It would be double counting to 
count sales of used goods in current GDP. If someone sells a used car to you, the transaction is 
not counted in GDP because no new production has taken place. Similarly, a house is counted in 
GDP only at the time it is built, not each time it is resold. In short:
GDP does not count transactions in which money or goods changes hands and in which 
no new goods and services are produced.
Sales of stocks and bonds are not counted in GDP. These exchanges are transfers of 
 ownership of assets, either electronically or through paper exchanges, and do not correspond to 
current production. What if you sell the stock or bond for more than you originally paid for it? 
Profits from the stock or bond market have nothing to do with current production, so they are 
not counted in GDP. However, if you pay a fee to a broker for selling a stock of yours to someone 
else, this fee is counted in GDP because the broker is performing a service for you. This service 
is part of current production. Be careful to distinguish between exchanges of stocks and bonds 
for money (or for other stocks and bonds), which do not involve current production, and fees for 
performing such exchanges, which do.
Exclusion of Output Produced Abroad by Domestically 
Owned Factors of Production
GDP is the value of output produced by factors of production located within a country.
The three basic factors of production are land, labor, and capital. The output produced by U.S. 
citizens abroad—for example, U.S. citizens working for a foreign company—is not counted in 
U.S. GDP because the output is not produced within the United States. Likewise, profits earned 
abroad by U.S. companies are not counted in U.S. GDP. However, the output produced by 
 foreigners working in the United States is counted in U.S. GDP because the output is produced 
within the United States. Also, profits earned in the United States by foreign-owned companies 
are counted in U.S. GDP.
It is sometimes useful to have a measure of the output produced by factors of production 
owned by a country’s citizens regardless of where the output is produced. This measure is called 
gross national product (GNP). For most countries, including the United States, the difference 
between GDP and GNP is small. In 2014, GNP for the United States was $17,630.6 billion, which 
is close to the $17,418.9 billion value for U.S. GDP.
The distinction between GDP and GNP can be tricky. Consider the Honda plant in 
Marysville, Ohio. The plant is owned by the Honda Corporation, a Japanese firm, but most 
gross national product (GNP)  
The total market value of 
all final goods and  services 
 produced within a given period 
by factors of  production 
owned by a country’s citizens, 
 regardless of where the output 
is produced.
460 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
of the workers employed at the plant are U.S. workers. Although all the output of the plant is 
included in U.S. GDP, only part of it is included in U.S. GNP. The wages paid to U.S. workers 
are part of U.S. GNP, whereas the profits from the plant are not. The profits from the plant 
are counted in Japanese GNP because this is output produced by Japanese-owned factors of 
 production (Japanese capital in this case). The profits, however, are not counted in Japanese 
GDP because they were not earned in Japan.
Calculating GDP
GDP can be computed two ways. One way is to add up the total amount spent on all final goods 
and services during a given period. This is the expenditure approach to calculating GDP. The other 
way is to add up the income—wages, rents, interest, and profits—received by all factors of produc-
tion in producing final goods and services. This is the income approach to calculating GDP. These 
two methods lead to the same value for GDP for the reason we discussed in the  previous chapter: 
Every payment (expenditure) by a buyer is at the same time a receipt (income) for the seller. We can measure 
either income received or expenditures made, and we will end up with the same total output.
Suppose the economy is made up of just one firm and the firm’s total output this year sells 
for $1 million. Because the total amount spent on output this year is $1 million, this year’s GDP 
is $1 million. (Remember: The expenditure approach calculates GDP on the basis of the total 
amount spent on final goods and services in the economy.) However, every one of the million 
 dollars of GDP either is paid to someone or remains with the owners of the firm as profit. Using 
the income approach, we add up the wages paid to employees of the firm, the interest paid to 
those who lent money to the firm, and the rents paid to those who leased land, buildings, or 
equipment to the firm. What is left over is profit, which is, of course, income to the owners 
of the firm. If we add up the incomes of all the factors of production, including profits to the 
 owners, we get a GDP of $1 million.
The Expenditure Approach
Recall from the previous chapter the four main groups in the economy: households, firms, the 
government, and the rest of the world. There are also four main categories of expenditure:
■
■Personal consumption expenditures (C): household spending on consumer goods
■
■Gross private domestic investment (I): spending by firms and households on new capital, 
that is, plant, equipment, inventory, and new residential structures
■
■Government consumption and gross investment (G)
■
■Net exports (EX - IM): net spending by the rest of the world, or exports (EX) minus 
imports (IM)
The expenditure approach calculates GDP by adding together these four components of 
spending. It is shown here in equation form:
21.2 Learning Objective
Explain two methods for 
 calculating GDP.
expenditure approach A 
method of computing GDP 
that measures the total 
amount spent on all final 
goods and services during a 
given period.
income approach A method 
of computing GDP that mea-
sures the income—wages, rents, 
interest, and profits—received 
by all factors of production 
in producing final goods and 
services.
GDP = C + I + G + (EX - IM)
U.S. GDP was $17,418.9 billion in 2014. The four components of the expenditure approach 
are shown in Table 21.2, along with their various categories. 
Personal Consumption Expenditures (C) The largest part of GDP consists of personal 
consumption expenditures (C). Table 21.2 shows that in 2014, the amount of personal consump-
tion expenditures accounted for 68.5 percent of GDP. These are expenditures by consumers on 
goods and services.
There are three main categories of consumer expenditures: durable goods, nondurable 
goods, and services. Durable goods, such as automobiles, furniture, and household appliances, 
last a relatively long time. Nondurable goods, such as food, clothing, gasoline, and cigarettes, 
are used up fairly quickly. Payments for services—those things we buy that do not involve the 
personal consumption 
 expenditures (C)  
Expenditures by consumers  
on goods and services.
durable goods Goods that 
last a relatively long time, 
such as cars and household 
appliances.
nondurable goods Goods 
that are used up fairly quickly, 
such as food and clothing.
services The things we buy 
that do not involve the produc-
tion of physical things, such as 
legal and medical services and 
education.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 461 
Table 21.2 Components of U.S. GDP, 2014: The expenditure approach
Note: Numbers may not add exactly because of rounding.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015.
Billions of Dollars ($)
Percentage of GDP (%)
Personal consumption expenditures (C)
11,930.3
 68.5
 Durable goods
1,302.5
 7.5
 Nondurable goods
2,666.2
15.3
 Services
7,961.7
45.7
Gross private domestic investment (I)
 2,851.6
 16.4
 Nonresidential
2,210.5
12.7
 Residential
  559.1
 3.2
 Change in business inventories
   82.0
 0.5
Government consumption and gross investment (G)  3,175.2
 18.2
 Federal
1,219.2
 7.0
 State and local
1,956.1
11.2
Net exports (EX - IM) 
 −538.2
 −3.1
 Exports (EX
2,337.0
13.4
 Imports (IM)
      
2,875.2
    
16.5
Gross domestic product
17,418.9
100.0
E con o m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
Where Does eBay Get Counted?
eBay runs an online marketplace with more than 220  million 
registered users who buy and sell 2.4 billion items a year, rang-
ing from children’s toys to oil paintings. In December 2007, one 
eBay user auctioned off a 1933 Chicago World’s Fair pennant. 
The winning bid was slightly more than $20.
eBay is traded on the New York Stock Exchange, employs 
hundreds of people, and has a market value of about $40 billion. 
With regard to eBay, what do you think gets counted as part of 
current GDP?
That 1933 pennant, for example, does not get counted. The 
production of that pennant was counted back in 1933. The 
many cartons of K’nex bricks sent from one home to another 
don’t count either. Their value was counted when the bricks 
were first produced. What about a newly minted Scrabble 
game? One of the interesting features of eBay is that it has 
changed from being a market in which individuals  market 
their hand-me-downs to a place that small and even large 
businesses use as a sales site. The value of the new Scrabble 
game would be counted as part of this year’s GDP if it were 
produced this year.
So do any of eBay’s services count as part of GDP? eBay’s 
business is to provide a marketplace for exchange. In doing 
so, it uses labor and capital and creates value. In return for 
creating this value, eBay charges fees to the sellers that use 
its site. The value of these fees does enter into GDP. So 
although the old knickknacks that people sell on eBay do 
ThiNkiNG PrAcTicAlly
1. John has a 2009 honda civic. in 2013, he sells it to 
Mary for $10,000. is that $10,000 counted in the 
GDP for 2013?
2. if John is an automobile dealer, does that change 
your answer to Question 1 at all?
not contribute to current GDP, the cost of finding an inter-
ested buyer for those old goods does indeed get counted.
production of physical items—include expenditures for doctors, lawyers, and educational institu-
tions. As Table 21.2 shows, in 2014, durable goods expenditures accounted for 7.5 percent of GDP, 
nondurables for 15.3 percent, and services for 45.7 percent. Almost half of GDP is now service 
consumption.
462 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
Gross Private Domestic Investment (I) Investment, as we use the term in economics, 
refers to the purchase of new capital—housing, plants, equipment, and inventory. The economic 
use of the term is in contrast to its everyday use, where investment often refers to purchases of 
stocks, bonds, or mutual funds.
Total investment in capital by the private sector is called gross private domestic 
 investment (I). Expenditures by firms for machines, tools, plants, and so on make up 
 nonresidential investment.1 Because these are goods that firms buy for their own final use, 
they are part of “final sales” and counted in GDP. Expenditures for new houses and  apartment 
 buildings constitute residential investment. The third component of gross  private domestic 
investment, the change in business inventories, is the amount by which firms’  inventories 
change during a period. Business inventories can be looked at as the goods that firms 
 produce now but intend to sell later. In 2014, gross private domestic investment accounted 
for 16.4 percent of GDP. Of that, 12.7 percent was nonresidential investment, 3.2 percent was 
 residential investment, and 0.5 percent was change in business inventories.
Change in Business Inventories 
Why is the change in business inventories considered a 
component of investment—the purchase of new capital? To run a business most firms hold 
inventories, in part because they cannot predict exactly how much will be sold each day and 
want to avoid losing sales by running out of a product. Inventories—goods produced for later 
sale—are counted as capital because they produce value in the future. An increase in inventories 
is an increase in capital.
Regarding GDP, remember that it is not the market value of total final sales during the 
period, but rather the market value of total final production. The relationship between total 
 production and total sales is as follows:
gross private domestic invest-
ment (I) Total investment in 
capital—that is, the  purchase 
of new housing, plants, 
 equipment, and inventory by 
the private (or nongovern-
ment) sector.
nonresidential investment  
Expenditures by firms for 
machines, tools, plants, and 
so on.
1 The distinction between what is considered investment and what is considered consumption is sometimes fairly arbitrary.  
A firm’s purchase of a car or a truck is counted as investment, but a household’s purchase of a car or a truck is counted 
as  consumption of durable goods. In general, expenditures by firms for items that last longer than a year are counted as 
 investment expenditures. Expenditures for items that last less than a year are seen as purchases of intermediate goods.
residential investment  
Expenditures by households 
and firms on new houses and 
apartment buildings.
change in business inventories  
The amount by which firms’ 
inventories change during a 
period. inventories are the 
goods that firms produce now 
but intend to sell later.
Total production (GDP) equals final sales of domestic goods plus the change in business 
inventories. In 2014, production in the United States was larger than sales by $82.0 billion. The 
stock of inventories at the end of 2014 was $82.0 billion larger than it was at the end of 2013—the 
change in business inventories was $82.0 billion.
Gross Investment versus Net Investment 
During the process of production, capital 
(especially machinery and equipment) produced in previous periods gradually wears out. 
GDP includes newly produced capital goods but does not take account of capital goods 
“consumed” in the production process. As a result, GDP overstates the real production of an 
economy because it does not account for the part of that production that serves just to replace 
worn out capital.
The amount by which an asset’s value falls each period is called its depreciation.2 A per-
sonal computer purchased by a business today may be expected to have a useful life of 4 years 
before becoming worn out or obsolete. Over that period, the computer steadily depreciates.
What is the relationship between gross investment (I) and depreciation? Gross investment 
is the total value of all newly produced capital goods (plant, equipment, housing, and inventory) 
produced in a given period. It takes no account of the fact that some capital wears out and must 
be replaced. Net investment is equal to gross investment minus depreciation. Net investment 
is a measure of how much the stock of capital changes during a period. Positive net investment 
means that the amount of new capital produced exceeds the amount that wears out, and nega-
tive net investment means that the amount of new capital produced is less than the amount that 
wears out. Therefore, if net investment is positive, the capital stock has increased, and if net 
depreciation The amount by 
which an asset’s value falls in  
a given period.
2 This is the formal definition of economic depreciation. Because depreciation is difficult to measure precisely, accounting rules 
allow firms to use shortcut methods to approximate the amount of depreciation that they incur each period. To complicate 
matters even more, the U.S. tax laws allow firms to deduct depreciation for tax purposes under a different set of rules.
gross investment The total 
value of all newly produced 
capital goods (plant, equip-
ment, housing, and inventory) 
produced in a given period.
net investment Gross 
 investment minus depreciation.
GDP = Final sales + Change in business inventories
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 463 
Government Consumption and Gross Investment (G) 
Government consumption 
and gross investment (G) include expenditures by federal, state, and local governments for 
final goods (bombs, pencils, school buildings) and services (military salaries, congressional 
salaries, school teachers’ salaries). Some of these expenditures are counted as government 
consumption, and some are counted as government gross investment. Government transfer 
payments (Social Security benefits, veterans’ disability stipends, and so on) are not included in 
G because these transfers are not purchases of anything currently produced. The payments are 
not made in exchange for any goods or services. Because interest payments on the government 
debt are also counted as transfers, they are excluded from GDP on the grounds that they are not 
payments for current goods or services.
As Table 21.2 shows, government consumption and gross investment accounted for 
$3,175.2 billion, or 18.2 percent of U.S. GDP, in 2014. Federal government consumption and 
gross investment accounted for 7.0 percent of GDP, and state and local government consump-
tion and gross investment accounted for 11.2 percent.
Net Exports (EX - IM) 
The value of net exports (EX - IM) is the difference between 
 exports (sales to foreigners of U.S.-produced goods and services) and imports (U.S. purchases of 
goods and services from abroad). This figure can be positive or negative. In 2014, the United 
States exported less than it imported, so the level of net exports was negative (-$538.2 billion). 
Before 1976, the United States was generally a net exporter—exports exceeded imports, so the 
net export figure was positive.
The reason for including net exports in the definition of GDP is simple. Consumption, 
investment, and government spending (C, I, and G, respectively) include expenditures on goods 
produced at home and abroad. Therefore, C + I + G overstates domestic production because 
it contains expenditures on foreign-produced goods—that is, imports (IM), which have to be 
subtracted from GDP to obtain the correct figure. At the same time, C + I + G understates 
domestic production because some of what a nation produces is sold abroad and therefore is 
not included in C, I, or G—exports (EX) have to be added in. If a U.S. firm produces computers 
and sells them in Germany, the computers are part of U.S. production and should be counted 
as part of U.S. GDP.
The Income Approach
We now turn to calculating GDP using the income approach, which looks at GDP in terms of 
who receives it as income rather than as who purchases it.
We begin with the concept of national income, which is defined in Table 21.3. National 
income is the sum of eight income items. Compensation of employees, the largest of the eight 
items by far, includes wages and salaries paid to households by firms and by the government, as 
well as various supplements to wages and salaries such as contributions that employers make to 
social insurance and private pension funds. Proprietors’ income is the income of unincorpo-
rated businesses. Rental income, a minor item, is the income received by property owners in the 
form of rent. Corporate profits, the second-largest item of the eight, is the income of corpora-
tions. Net interest is the interest paid by business. (Interest paid by households and the govern-
ment is not counted in GDP because it is not assumed to flow from the production of goods and 
services.)
The sixth item, indirect taxes minus subsidies, includes taxes such as sales taxes, customs 
duties, and license fees less subsidies that the government pays for which it receives no goods or 
services in return. (Subsidies are like negative taxes.) The value of indirect taxes minus subsidies 
is thus net revenue received by the government. Net business transfer payments are net transfer 
government consumption  
and gross investment (G)  
Expenditures by federal, state, 
and local governments for final 
goods and services.
net exports (EX - IM) The 
difference between exports 
(sales to foreigners of U.S.- 
produced goods and services) 
and imports (U.S. purchases 
of goods and services from 
abroad). The figure can be 
positive or negative.
national income The total 
income earned by the factors 
of production owned by a 
country’s citizens.
compensation of employees  
includes wages, salaries, and 
various supplements—employer 
contributions to social insur-
ance and pension funds, for 
example—paid to households 
by firms and by the government.
proprietors’ income The 
income of unincorporated 
businesses.
rental income The income 
received by property owners  
in the form of rent.
corporate profits The income 
of corporations.
net interest The interest paid 
by business.
indirect taxes minus subsidies  
Taxes such as sales taxes, cus-
toms duties, and license fees 
less subsidies that the govern-
ment pays for which it receives 
no goods or services in return. 
is net revenue received by the 
government.
net business transfer payments  
Net transfer payments by busi-
nesses to others.
capitalend of period = capitalbeginning of period + net investment
investment is negative, the capital stock has decreased. Put another way, the capital stock at the 
end of a period is  equal to the capital stock that existed at the beginning of the period plus net 
investment:
464 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
payments by businesses to others and are thus income of others. The final item is the surplus of 
government enterprises, which is the income of government enterprises. Table 21.3 shows that 
this item was negative in 2014: government enterprises on net ran at a loss.
National income is the total income of the country, but it is not quite GDP. Table 21.4 shows 
what is involved in going from national income to GDP. Table 21.4 first shows that in moving from 
GDP to GNP, we need to add receipts of factor income from the rest of the world and subtract 
 payments of factor income to the rest of the world. National income is income of the country’s 
 citizens, not the income of the residents of the country. So we first need to move from GDP to 
GNP. This, as discussed previously, is a minor adjustment.
We then need to subtract depreciation from GNP, which is a large adjustment. GNP less depre-
ciation is called net national product (NNP). Why is depreciation subtracted? To see why, go back 
to the example previously in this chapter in which the economy is made up of just one firm and 
total output (GDP) for the year is $1 million. Assume that after the firm pays wages, interest, and 
rent, it has $100,000 left. Assume also that its capital stock depreciated by $40,000 during the year. 
National income includes corporate profits (see Table 21.3), and in calculating corporate profits, 
the $40,000 depreciation is subtracted from the $100,000, leaving profits of $60,000. So national 
income does not include the $40,000. When we calculate GDP using the expenditure approach, 
however,  depreciation is not subtracted. We simply add consumption, investment, government 
spending, and net exports. In our simple example, this is just $1 million. We thus must subtract 
depreciation from GDP (actually GNP when there is a rest-of-the-world sector) to get national 
income.
Table 21.4 shows that net national product and national income are the same except for a 
statistical discrepancy, a data measurement error. If the government were completely accurate 
in its data collection, the statistical discrepancy would be zero. The data collection, however, is 
not perfect, and the statistical discrepancy is the measurement error in each period. Table 21.4 
shows that in 2014, this error was $176.0 billion, which is small compared to national income of 
$15,070.4 billion.
surplus of government 
 enterprises income of 
 government enterprises.
net national product (NNP)  
Gross national product minus 
depreciation; a nation’s total 
product minus what is required 
to maintain the value of its 
capital stock.
statistical discrepancy Data 
measurement error.
Table 21.3 National Income, 2014
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015.
Billions of Dollars ($)
Percentage  
of National 
Inc ome (%)
National income
15,070.4
100.0
 Compensation of employees
9,221.6
61.2
 Proprietors’ income
1,380.2
 9.2
 Rental income
  640.2
 4.2
 Corporate profits
2,089.8
13.9
 Net interest
  486.3
 3.2
 Indirect taxes minus subsidies
1,145.8
 7.6
 Net business transfer payments
  140.6
 0.9
 Surplus of government enterprises
  −34.2
−0.2
Table 21.4 GDP, GNP, NNP, and National Income, 2014
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015.
Dollars  
($, Billions)
GDP
 17,418.9
 Plus: Receipts of factor income from the rest of the world
   +827.7
 Less: Payments of factor income to the rest of the world
    −616.0
Equals: GNP
 17,630.6
 Less: Depreciation
 −2,736.2
Equals: Net national product (NNP)
14,894.4
 Less: Statistical discrepancy
   −176.0
Equals: National income
 15,070.4
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 465 
We have so far seen from Table 21.3 the various income items that make up total national 
income, and we have seen from Table 21.4 how GDP and national income are related. A use-
ful way to think about national income is to consider how much of it goes to households. 
The total income of households is called personal income, and it turns out that almost all of 
national income is personal income. Table 21.5 shows that of the $15,070.4 billion in national 
income in 2014, $14,728.6 billion was personal income. The second line in Table 21.5, the 
amount of national income not going to households, includes the profits of corporations not 
paid to households in the form of dividends, called the retained earnings of corporations. This 
is income that stays inside corporations for some period rather than going to households, and 
so it is part of national income but not personal income.
Personal income is the income received by households before they pay personal income 
taxes. The amount of income that households have to spend or save is called disposable 
 personal income, or after-tax income . It is equal to personal income minus personal income 
taxes, as shown in Table 21.5.
Because disposable personal income is the amount of income that households can spend or 
save, it is an important income concept. Table 21.5 shows there are three categories of spending: 
(1) personal consumption expenditures, (2) personal interest payments, and (3) transfer pay-
ments made by households. The amount of disposable personal income left after total personal 
spending is personal saving. If your monthly disposable income is $500 and you spend $450, 
you have $50 left at the end of the month. Your personal saving is $50 for the month. Your per-
sonal saving level can be negative: If you earn $500 and spend $600 during the month, you have 
dissaved $100. To spend $100 more than you earn, you will have to borrow the $100 from some-
one, take the $100 from your savings account, or sell an asset you own.
The personal saving rate is the percentage of disposable personal income saved, an impor-
tant indicator of household behavior. A low saving rate means households are spending a large 
fraction of their income. As Table 21.5 shows, the U.S. personal saving rate in 2014 was 4.8 
percent. Saving rates tend to rise during recessionary periods, when consumers become anxious 
about their future, and fall during boom times, as pent-up spending demand gets released. In 
2005 the saving rate got down to 2.5 percent.
Nominal versus Real GDP
We have thus far looked at GDP measured in current dollars, or the current prices we pay for 
goods and services. When we measure something in current dollars, we refer to it as a nominal 
value. Nominal GDP is GDP measured in current dollars—all components of GDP valued at 
their current prices.
In most applications in macroeconomics, however, nominal GDP is not what we are after. 
It is not a good measure of aggregate output over time. Why? Assume that there is only one 
personal income The total 
income of households.
disposable personal income 
or after-tax income Personal 
income minus personal income 
taxes. The amount that house-
holds have to spend or save.
personal saving The amount 
of disposable income that is 
left after total personal spend-
ing in a given period.
personal saving rate The 
percentage of disposable 
 personal income that is saved. 
if the personal saving rate is 
low, households are spending 
a large amount relative to their 
incomes; if it is high, house-
holds are spending cautiously.
21.3 Learning Objective
Discuss the difference between 
real GDP and nominal GDP.
current dollars The current 
prices that we pay for goods 
and services.
nominal GDP Gross domes-
tic product measured in 
 current dollars.
Table 21.5  National Income, Personal Income, Disposable Personal 
Income, and Personal Saving, 2014
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015.
Dollar 
(Billions, $)
National income
 15,070.4
 Less: Amount of national income not going to households
   −341.8
Equals: Personal income
 14,728.6
 Less: Personal income taxes
 −1,742.9
Equals: Disposable personal income
 12,985.8
 Less: Personal consumption expenditures
−11,930.3
    Personal interest payments
   −256.8
    Transfer payments made by households
   −170.3
Equals: Personal saving
    628.3
Personal saving as a percentage of disposable personal income:
     4.8%
466 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
E co n o m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
GDP: One of the Great Inventions of the 20th Century
As the 20th century drew to a close, the U.S. Department 
of Commerce embarked on a review of its achievements. At 
the conclusion of this review, the Department named the 
development of the national income and product accounts as 
“its achievement of the century.”
J. Steven Landefeld Director, Bureau 
of Economic Analysis
While the GDP and the rest of the national income accounts 
may seem to be arcane concepts, they are truly among the 
great inventions of the twentieth century.
Paul A. Samuelson and William D. Nordhaus
GDP! The right concept of economy-wide output, accurately 
measured. The U.S. and the world rely on it to tell where we 
are in the business cycle and to estimate long-run growth. 
It is the centerpiece of an elaborate and indispensable sys-
tem of social accounting, the national income and product 
accounts. This is surely the single most innovative achieve-
ment of the Commerce Department in the 20th century. I 
was fortunate to become an economist in the 1930’s when 
Kuznets, Nathan, Gilbert, and Jaszi were creating this most 
important set of economic time series. In economic the-
ory, macroeconomics was just beginning at the same time. 
Complementary, these two innovations deserve much credit 
for the improved performance of the economy in the second 
half of the century.
James Tobin
From the Survey of Current BuSineSS
Prior to the development of the NIPAs [national income and 
product accounts], policy makers had to guide the economy 
using limited and fragmentary information about the state of 
the economy. The Great Depression underlined the problems 
of incomplete data and led to the development of the national 
accounts:
One reads with dismay of Presidents Hoover and then 
Roosevelt designing policies to combat the Great Depression 
of the 1930s on the basis of such sketchy data as stock 
price indices, freight car loadings, and incomplete indices 
of industrial production. The fact was that comprehensive 
measures of national income and output did not exist at 
the time. The Depression, and with it the growing role of 
government in the economy, emphasized the need for such 
measures and led to the development of a comprehensive set 
of national income accounts.
Richard T. Froyen
In response to this need in the 1930s, the Department of 
Commerce commissioned Nobel laureate Simon Kuznets of 
ThiNkiNG PrAcTicAlly
1. The articles emphasize the importance of being able 
to measure an economy’s output to improve govern-
ment policy. looking at recent news, can you identify 
one economic policy debate or action that referenced 
GDP?
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economics, “GDP: One of the Great 
Inventions of the 20th Century,” Survey of Current Business, January 2000, pp. 6–9.
the National Bureau of Economic Research to develop a set of 
national economic accounts. . . . Professor Kuznets coordinated 
the work of researchers at the National Bureau of Economic 
Research in New York and his staff at Commerce. The original 
set of accounts was presented in a report to Congress in 1937 
and in a research report, National Income, 1929–35. . . .
The national accounts have become the mainstay of mod-
ern macroeconomic analysis, allowing policy makers, econo-
mists, and the business community to analyze the impact of 
different tax and spending plans, the impact of oil and other 
price shocks, and the impact of monetary policy on the econ-
omy as a whole and on specific components of final demand, 
incomes, industries, and regions.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 467 
good—say, pizza, which is the same quality year after year. In each year 1 and 2, one hundred 
units (slices) of pizza were produced. Production thus remained the same for year 1 and year 2. 
Suppose the price of pizza increased from $1.00 per slice in year 1 to $1.10 per slice in year 2. 
Nominal GDP in year 1 is $100 (100 units *  $1.00 per unit), and nominal GDP in year 2 is $110 
(100 units *  $1.10 per unit). Nominal GDP has increased by $10 even though no more slices 
of pizza were produced and the quality of the pizza did not improve. If we use nominal GDP to 
measure growth, we can be misled into thinking production has grown when all that has really 
happened is a rise in the price level (inflation).
If there were only one good in the economy—for example, pizza—it would be easy to mea-
sure production and compare one year’s value to another’s. We would add up all the pizza slices 
produced each year. In the example, production is 100 in both years. If the number of slices had 
increased to 105 in year 2, we would say production increased by 5 slices between year 1 and 
year 2, which is a 5 percent increase. Alas, however, there is more than one good in the economy 
which makes adjusting for price changes more complex.
The following is a discussion of how the BEA adjusts nominal GDP for price changes. As you 
read the discussion, you will see that this adjustment is not easy. Even in an economy of just apples 
and oranges, it would not be obvious how to add up apples and oranges to get an overall measure of 
output. The BEA’s task is to add up thousands of goods, each of whose price is changing over time.
In the following discussion, we will use the concept of a weight, either price weights or 
quantity weights. What is a weight? It is easiest to define the term by an example. Suppose in 
your economics course there is a final exam and two other tests. If the final exam counts for 
one-half of the grade and the other two tests for one-fourth each, the “weights” are one-half, 
one-fourth, and one-fourth. If instead the final exam counts for 80 percent of the grade and the 
other two tests for 10 percent each, the weights are 0.8, 0.1, and 0.1. The more important an item 
is in a group, the larger its weight.
Calculating Real GDP
Nominal GDP adjusted for price changes is called real GDP. All the main issues involved in com-
puting real GDP can be discussed using a simple three-good economy and 2 years. Table 21.6 
presents all the data that we will need. The table presents price and quantity data for 2 years and 
three goods. The goods are labeled A, B, and C, and the years are labeled 1 and 2. P denotes price, 
and Q denotes quantity. Keep in mind that everything in the following discussion, including 
the discussion of the GDP deflation, is based on the numbers in Table 21.6. Nothing has been 
brought in from the outside. The table is the entire economy.
The first thing to note from Table 21.6 is that nominal output—in current dollars—in year 
1 for good A is the number of units of good A produced in year 1 (6) times the price of good A 
in year 1 ($0.50), which is $3.00. Similarly, nominal output in year 1 is 7 *  $0.30 = $2.10 for 
good B and 10 *  $0.70 = $7.00 for good C. The sum of these three amounts, $12.10 in col-
umn 5, is nominal GDP in year 1 in this simple economy. Nominal GDP in year 2—calculated by 
weight The importance 
attached to an item within a 
group of items.
Table 21.6 a Three-Good economy
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
 
 
 
Production
 
 
 
Price per Unit
 
GDP in 
Year 1 in 
Year 1 
Prices 
P1 *  Q1 
 
GDP in 
Year 2 in 
Year 1 
Prices 
P1 *  Q2 
 
GDP in 
Year 1 in 
Year 2 
Prices 
P2 *  Q1 
 
GDP in 
Year 2 in 
Year 2 
Prices 
P2 *  Q2 
Year 1 
Q1
Year 2 
Q2
Year 1 
P1
Year 2 
P2
Good A
 6
11
$0.50
$0.40
$ 3.00
$  5.50
$  2.40
$  4.40
Good B
 7
 4
 0.30
 1.00
  2.10
  1.20
  7.00
  4.00
Good C
10
12
 0.70
 0.90
  7.00
  8.40
  9.00
 10.80
Total
$12.10
$15.10
$18.40
$19.20
Nominal 
GDP in 
year 1
Nominal 
GDP in 
year 2
468 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
using the year 2 quantities and the year 2 prices—is $19.20 (column 8). Nominal GDP has risen 
from $12.10 in year 1 to $19.20 in year 2, an increase of 58.7 percent.3
You can see that the price of each good changed between year 1 and year 2—the price of 
good A fell (from $0.50 to $0.40) and the prices of goods B and C rose (B from $0.30 to $1.00; C 
from $0.70 to $0.90). Some of the change in nominal GDP between years 1 and 2 is as a result 
of price changes and not production changes. How much can we attribute to price changes and 
how much to production changes? Here things get tricky. The procedure that the BEA used 
before 1996 was to pick a base year and to use the prices in that base year as weights to calculate 
real GDP. This is a fixed-weight procedure because the weights used, which are the prices, are 
the same for all years—namely, the prices that prevailed in the base year.
Let us use the fixed-weight procedure and year 1 as the base year, which means using year 1 
prices as the weights. Then in Table 21.6, real GDP in year 1 is $12.10 (column 5) and real GDP in 
year 2 is $15.10 (column 6). Note that both columns use year 1 prices and that nominal and real 
GDP are the same in year 1 because year 1 is the base year. Real GDP has increased from $12.10 
to $15.10, an increase of 24.8 percent.
Let us now use the fixed-weight procedure and year 2 as the base year, which means using 
year 2 prices as the weights. In Table 21.6, real GDP in year 1 is $18.40 (column 7) and real GDP 
in year 2 is $19.20 (column 8). Note that both columns use year 2 prices and that nominal and 
real GDP are the same in year 2, because year 2 is the base year. Real GDP has increased from 
$18.40 to $19.20, an increase of 4.3 percent.
This example shows that growth rates can be sensitive to the choice of the base year—24.8 
percent using year 1 prices as weights and 4.3 percent using year 2 prices as weights. For many 
policy decisions, the growth rates play a role so that large differences coming from a seemingly 
arbitrary choice of base year is troubling. The old BEA procedure simply picked one year as the 
base year and did all the calculations using the prices in that year as weights. The new BEA pro-
cedure makes two important changes. The first (using the current example) is to take the aver-
age of the two years’ price changes, in other words, to “split the difference” between 24.8 percent 
and 4.3 percent. What does “splitting the difference” mean? One way is to take the average of the 
two numbers, which is 14.55 percent. What the BEA does is to take the geometric average, which 
for the current example is 14.09 percent.4 These two averages (14.55 percent and 14.09 percent) 
are quite close, and the use of either would give similar results. The point here is not that the 
geometric average is used, but that the first change is to split the difference using some average. 
When prices are going up, this procedure will lower the estimates of real growth rates relative 
to the use of year 1 as a base year, and conversely when prices are falling. Note that this new 
procedure requires two “base” years because 24.8 percent was computed using year 1 prices as 
weights and 4.3 percent was computed using year 2 prices as weights.
The second BEA change is to use years 1 and 2 as the base years when computing the per-
centage change between years 1 and 2, then use years 2 and 3 as the base years when computing 
the percentage change between years 2 and 3, and so on. The two base years change as the cal-
culations move through time. The series of percentage changes computed this way is taken to be 
the series of growth rates of real GDP. So in this way, nominal GDP is adjusted for price changes. 
To make sure you understand this, review the calculations in Table 21.6, which provides all the 
data you need to see what is going on.
Calculating the GDP Deflator
We now switch gears from real GDP, a quantity measure, to the GDP deflator, a price measure. 
One of economic policy makers’ goals is to keep changes in the overall price level small. For this 
reason, policy makers not only need good measures of how real output is changing but also good 
measures of how the overall price level is changing. The GDP deflator is one measure of the overall 
price level. We can use the data in Table 21.6 to show how the BEA computes the GDP deflator.
In Table 21.6, the price of good A fell from $0.50 in year 1 to $0.40 in year 2, the price of 
good B rose from $0.30 to $1.00, and the price of good C rose from $0.70 to $0.90. If we are 
3 The percentage change is calculated as 3(19.20 - 12.10)>12.104 *  100 = .587 *  100 = 58.7 percent.
base year The year chosen for 
the weights in a fixed-weight 
procedure.
fixed-weight procedure A 
procedure that uses weights 
from a given base year.
4 The geometric average is computed as the square root of 124.8 *  104.3, which is 114.09.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 469 
interested only in how individual prices change, this is all the information we need. However, if 
we are interested in how the overall price level changes, we need to weight the individual prices in 
some way. Is it getting more expensive to live in this economy or less expensive? In this example 
that clearly depends on how people spend their incomes. So, the obvious weights to use are the 
quantities produced, but which quantities—those of year 1 or year 2? The same issues arise here 
for the quantity weights as for the price weights in computing real GDP.
Let us first use the fixed-weight procedure and year 1 as the base year, which means using 
year 1 quantities as the weights. Then in Table 21.6, the “bundle” price in year 1 is $12.10 (col-
umn 5) and the bundle price in year 2 is $18.40 (column 7). Both columns use year 1 quantities. 
The bundle price has increased from $12.10 to $18.40, an increase of 52.1 percent.
Next, use the fixed-weight procedure and year 2 as the base year, which means using year 
2 quantities as the weights. Then the bundle price in year 1 is $15.10 (column 6), and the bundle 
price in year 2 is $19.20 (column 8). Both columns use year 2 quantities. The bundle price has 
increased from $15.10 to $19.20, an increase of 27.2 percent.
This example shows that overall price increases can be sensitive to the choice of the base 
year: 52.1 percent using year 1 quantities as weights and 27.2 percent using year 2 quantities as 
weights. Again, the old BEA procedure simply picked one year as the base year and did all the 
calculations using the quantities in the base year as weights. First, the new procedure splits the 
difference between 52.1 percent and 27.2 percent by taking the geometric average, which is 39.1 
percent. Second, it uses years 1 and 2 as the base years when computing the percentage change 
between years 1 and 2, years 2 and 3 as the base years when computing the percentage change 
between years 2 and 3, and so on. The series of percentage changes computed this way is taken 
to be the series of percentage changes in the GDP deflator, that is, a series of inflation rates.
The Problems of Fixed Weights
To see why the BEA switched to the new procedure, let us consider a number of problems using 
fixed-price weights to compute real GDP. First, 1987 price weights, the last price weights the 
BEA used before it changed procedures, are not likely to be accurate for, say, 2014. Many struc-
tural changes took place in the U.S. economy between 1987 and 2014, and it seems unlikely that 
1987 prices are good weights to use for this much later period.
Another problem is that the use of fixed-price weights does not account for the responses 
in the economy to supply shifts. Perhaps bad weather leads to a lower production of oranges 
in year 2. In a simple supply-and-demand diagram for oranges, this corresponds to a shift of 
the supply curve to the left, which leads to an increase in the price of oranges and a decrease in 
the quantity demanded. As consumers move up the demand curve, they are substituting away 
from oranges. If technical advances in year 2 result in cheaper ways of producing computers, 
the result is a shift of the computer supply curve to the right, which leads to a decrease in the 
price of computers and an increase in the quantity demanded. Consumers are substituting 
toward computers. (You should be able to draw supply-and-demand diagrams for both cases.) 
Table 21.6 shows this tendency. The quantity of good A rose between years 1 and 2 and the price 
decreased (the computer case), whereas the quantity of good B fell and the price increased (the 
orange case). The computer supply curve has been shifting to the right over time, primarily 
because of technical advances. The result has been large decreases in the price of computers and 
large increases in the quantity demanded.
To see why these responses pose a problem for the use of fixed-price weights, consider the 
data in Table 21.6. Because the price of good A was higher in year 1, the increase in production of 
good A is weighted more if we use year 1 as the base year than if we used year 2 as the base year. 
Also, because the price of good B was lower in year 1, the decrease in production of good B is 
weighted less if we use year 1 as the base year. These effects make the overall change in real GDP 
larger if we use year 1 price weights than if we use year 2 price weights. Using year 1 price weights 
ignores the kinds of substitution responses discussed in the previous paragraph and leads to what 
many believe are too-large estimates of real GDP changes. In the past, the BEA tended to move the 
base year forward about every 5 years, resulting in the past estimates of real GDP growth being 
revised downward. It is undesirable to have past growth estimates change simply because of the 
change to a new base year. The new BEA procedure avoids many of these fixed-weight problems.
470 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
Similar problems arise when using fixed-quantity weights to compute price indexes. For 
example, the fixed-weight procedure ignores the substitution away from goods whose prices 
are increasing and toward goods whose prices are decreasing or increasing less rapidly. The 
procedure tends to overestimate the increase in the overall price level. As discussed in the next 
chapter, there are still a number of price indexes that are computed using fixed weights. The 
GDP deflator differs because it does not use fixed weights. It is also a price index for all the 
goods and services produced in the economy. Other price indexes cover fewer domestically 
produced goods and services but also include some imported (foreign-produced) goods and 
services.
It should finally be stressed that there is no “right” way of computing real GDP. The 
economy consists of many goods, each with its own price, and there is no exact way of adding 
together the production of the different goods. We can say that the BEA’s new procedure for 
computing real GDP avoids the problems associated with the use of fixed weights, and it seems 
to be an improvement over the old procedure. We will see in the next chapter, however, that the 
consumer price index (CPI)—a widely used price index—is still computed using fixed weights.
Limitations of the GDP Concept
We generally think of increases in GDP as good. Increasing GDP (or preventing its decrease) is 
usually considered one of the chief goals of the government’s macroeconomic policy. But there 
are some limitations to the use of GDP as a measure of welfare.
GDP and Social Welfare
If crime levels went down, society would be better off, but a decrease in crime is not an increase 
in output and is not reflected in GDP. Neither is an increase in leisure time. Yet to the extent 
that households want extra leisure time (instead of having it forced on them by a lack of jobs 
in the economy), an increase in leisure is also an increase in social welfare. Furthermore, some 
increases in social welfare are associated with a decrease in GDP. An increase in leisure during a 
time of full employment, for example, leads to a decrease in GDP because less time is spent on 
producing output.
Most nonmarket and domestic activities, such as housework and child care, are not counted 
in GDP even though they amount to real production. However, if I decide to send my children to 
day care or hire someone to clean my house or drive my car for me, GDP increases. The salaries 
of day care staff, cleaning people, and chauffeurs are counted in GDP, but the time I spend doing 
the same things is not counted. A mere change of institutional arrangements, even though no 
more output is being produced, can show up as a change in GDP.
Furthermore, GDP seldom reflects losses or social ills. GDP accounting rules do not adjust 
for production that pollutes the environment. The more production there is, the larger the GDP, 
regardless of how much pollution results in the process. The Economics in Practice box on the next 
page 471 discusses how counting for pollution affects GDP measures. GDP also has nothing to 
say about the distribution of output among individuals in a society. It does not distinguish, for 
example, between the case in which most output goes to a few people and the case in which 
 output is evenly divided among all people.
The Informal Economy
Many transactions are missed in the calculation of GDP even though, in principle, they should 
be counted. Most illegal transactions are missed unless they are “laundered” into legitimate 
business. Income that is earned but not reported as income for tax purposes is usually missed, 
although some adjustments are made in the GDP calculations to take misreported income into 
account. The part of the economy that should be counted in GDP but is not is sometimes called 
the informal economy.
21.4 Learning Objective
Discuss the limitations 
of  using GDP to measure 
well-being.
informal economy The part 
of the economy in which 
 transactions take place and in 
which income is generated that 
is unreported and therefore 
not counted in GDP.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 471 
E con o m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
An Alternative to GDP: The Human Development Index
GDP and GNI are often used as indicators of economic 
welfare. However, there is ample dissatisfaction with both 
as measures of a nation’s overall well-being. During the 
second half of the 20th century, debates about the multiple 
dimensions of economic development led to the creation, in 
1990, of a new indicator—the Human Development Index 
(HDI). First introduced by the United Nations Development 
Program, an international development agency, it is now 
widely used to compare well-being across nations.
Comparing country classifications based on GNI per 
capita and HDI yields interesting results. While the two are 
strongly correlated, since the HDI already incorporates the 
GNI, some high-income countries exhibit lower HDI scores 
than lower-income countries. Norway, a small high-income 
country, has consistently topped the HDI chart while hav-
ing a lower gross national income than other countries such 
as Singapore or Kuwait. However, it neglects important 
aspects of a country’s well-being, such as human rights 
or political participation. It also provides only aggregate 
country-level measures and not the distribution of well-
being within countries, leading some economists to pro-
pose alternatives like a “household-based HDI”.1
ThiNkiNG PrAcTicAlly
1. What are the other aspects of a nation’s well-being you 
think are missing from both hDi and GDP (or GNi) 
measures?
1 Kenneth Harttgen and Stephan Klasen, “A household-based Human 
Development Index”, Proceedings of the German Development Economics 
Conference, Hannover 2010, No. 30.
Tax evasion is usually thought to be one of the major incentives for people in developed 
countries to participate in the informal economy. Studies estimate the size of the U.S. informal 
economy at about 10 percent, whereas Europe is closer to 20 percent. In the developing world, 
for a range of reasons, the informal economy is much larger, particularly for women workers. In 
Latin America and Africa, it is estimated that the informal economy comprises well more than a 
third of GDP in many nations.5
Why should we care about the informal economy? To the extent that GDP reflects only 
a part of economic activity instead of a complete measure of what the economy produces, 
it is misleading. Unemployment rates, for example, may be lower than officially measured if 
people work in the informal economy without reporting this fact to the government. Also, 
if the size of the informal economy varies among countries—as it does—we can be misled 
when we  compare GDP among countries. For example, Italy’s GDP would be much higher 
if we considered its informal sector as part of the economy, and Switzerland’s GDP would 
change very little.
Gross National Income per Capita
Making comparisons across countries is difficult because such comparisons need to be made in 
a single currency, generally U.S. dollars. Converting GNP numbers for Japan into dollars requires 
converting from yen into dollars. Because exchange rates can change quite dramatically in short 
periods of time, such conversions are tricky. Recently, the World Bank adopted a new measur-
ing system for international comparisons. The concept of gross national income (GNI) is GNP 
converted into dollars using an average of currency exchange rates over several years adjusted 
5 Jacques Chermes, “The Informal Economy,” Journal of Applied Economic Research, 2012.
gross national income 
(GNI) GNP converted into 
dollars using an average of 
currency exchange rates over 
several years adjusted for rates 
of inflation.
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
472 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
0
$10,000
$20,000
$30,000
$40,000
$50,000
$60,000
$70,000
Norway
Switzerland
United States
Netherlands
Sweden
Austria
Denmark
Germany
Canada
Belgium
Australia
Finland
United Kingdom
Japan
France
Ireland
Italy
Spain
Korea, Rep. of
Israel
Greece
Portugal
Czech Republic
Russian Federation
Hungary
Turkey
Chile
Mexico
Romania
Venezuela, R.B.
Brazil
South Africa
Colombia
China
Thailand
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Jordan
Indonesia
Philippines
India
Vietnam
Pakistan
Nigeria
Bangladesh
Kenya
Rwanda
Nepal
Ethiopia
U.S. dollars
▴
▴FIGuRE 21.1 National Income for Selected Countries, 2013
Source: Data from GNI per capita, PPP (current international $), The World Bank Group, Retrieved from http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP 
.PP.CD/countries/1W?display=default
for rates of inflation. Figure 21.1 lists the gross national income per capita (GNI divided by popu-
lation) for various countries in 2013. Of the countries in the figure, Norway had the highest 
per capita GNI, followed by Switzerland, the United States, and the Netherlands. Ethiopia was 
estimated to have per capita GNI of only $1,380 in 2013. This compares to $66,520 for Norway.
Looking Ahead
This chapter has introduced many key variables in which macroeconomists are interested, 
including GDP and its components. There is much more to be learned about the data that 
 macroeconomists use. In the next chapter, we will discuss the data on employment, unemploy-
ment, and the labor force. In Chapter 25, we will discuss the data on money and interest rates. 
Finally, in Chapter 34, we will discuss in more detail the data on the relationship between the 
United States and the rest of the world.
S u M M A R y 
1. One source of data on the key variables in the macroecon-
omy is the national income and product accounts. These accounts 
provide a conceptual framework that macroeconomists use 
to think about how the pieces of the economy fit together.
21.1 GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT p. 458 
2. Gross domestic product (GDP) is the key concept in national 
income accounting. GDP is the total market value of all 
final goods and services produced within a given period 
by factors of production located within a country. GDP 
excludes intermediate goods. To include goods when they are 
purchased as inputs and when they are sold as final prod-
ucts would be double counting and would result in an over-
statement of the value of production.
3. GDP excludes all transactions in which money or goods 
change hands but in which no new goods and services are 
produced. GDP includes the income of foreigners working 
in the United States and the profits that foreign compa-
nies earn in the United States. GDP excludes the income 
of U.S.  citizens working abroad and profits earned by U.S. 
 companies in foreign countries.
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 473 
4. Gross national product (GNP) is the market value of all final 
goods and services produced during a given period by 
factors of production owned by a country’s citizens.
21.2 CALCULATING GDP p. 460 
5. The expenditure approach to GDP adds up the amount spent 
on all final goods and services during a given period. The 
four main categories of expenditures are personal consumption 
expenditures (C), gross private domestic investment (I), government 
consumption and gross investment (G), and net exports (EX - IM). 
The sum of these categories equals GDP.
6. The three main components of personal consumption expendi-
tures (C) are durable goods, nondurable goods, and services.
7. Gross private domestic investment (I) is the total investment 
made by the private sector in a given period. There are 
three kinds of investment: nonresidential investment, residential 
 investment, and changes in business inventories. Gross invest-
ment does not take depreciation—the decrease in the value 
of  assets—into account. Net investment is equal to gross 
 investment minus depreciation.
8. Government consumption and gross investment (G) include ex-
penditures by state, federal, and local governments for final 
goods and services. The value of net exports (EX - IM) equals 
the differences between exports (sales to foreigners of U.S.-
produced goods and services) and imports (U.S. purchases 
of goods and services from abroad).
9. Because every payment (expenditure) by a buyer is a receipt 
(income) for the seller, GDP can be computed in terms of 
who receives it as income—the income approach to calculat-
ing gross domestic product.
10. GNP minus depreciation is net national product (NNP). 
National income is the total amount earned by the factors of 
production in the economy. It is equal to NNP except for a 
statistical discrepancy. Personal income is the total income of 
households. Disposable personal income is what households 
have to spend or save after paying their taxes. The personal 
saving rate is the percentage of disposable personal income 
saved instead of spent.
21.3 NOMINAL VERSUS REAL GDP p. 465 
11. GDP measured in current dollars (the current prices that 
one pays for goods) is nominal GDP. If we use nominal 
GDP to measure growth, we can be misled into thinking 
that production has grown when all that has happened is 
a rise in the price level, or inflation. A better measure of 
 production is real GDP, which is nominal GDP adjusted for 
price changes.
12. The GDP deflator is a measure of the overall  
price level.
21.4 LIMITATIONS OF ThE GDP CONCEPT p. 470 
13. We generally think of increases in GDP as good, but 
some problems arise when we try to use GDP as a mea-
sure of happiness or well-being. The peculiarities of 
GDP accounting mean that institutional changes can 
change the value of GDP even if real production has not 
changed. GDP ignores most social ills, such as pollution. 
Furthermore, GDP tells us nothing about what kinds of 
goods are being produced or how income is distributed 
across the population. GDP also ignores many transac-
tions of the informal economy.
14. The concept of gross national income (GNI) is GNP converted 
into dollars using an average of currency exchange rates 
over several years adjusted for rates of inflation.
R e v I e w  T e R M S  A N D  C O N C e P T S
base year, p. 468 
change in business inventories, p. 462 
compensation of employees, p. 463 
corporate profits, p. 463 
current dollars, p. 465 
depreciation, p. 462 
disposable personal income, or after-tax 
income, p. 465 
durable goods, p. 460 
expenditure approach, p. 460 
final goods and services, p. 458 
fixed-weight procedure, p. 468 
government consumption and gross  
investment (G), p. 463 
gross domestic product (GDP), p. 458 
gross investment, p. 462 
gross national income (GNI), p. 471 
gross national product (GNP), p. 459 
gross private domestic investment (I), p. 462 
income approach, p. 460 
indirect taxes minus subsidies, p. 463 
informal economy, p. 470 
intermediate goods, p. 458 
national income, p. 463 
national income and product accounts, p. 457 
net business transfer payments, p. 463 
 net exports (EX - IM), p. 463 
net interest, p. 463 
net investment, p. 462 
net national product (NNP), p. 464 
nominal GDP, p. 465 
nondurable goods, p. 460 
nonresidential investment, p. 462 
personal consumption expenditures (C), p. 460 
personal income, p. 465 
personal saving, p. 465 
personal saving rate, p. 465 
proprietors’ income, p. 463 
rental income, p. 463 
residential investment, p. 462 
services, p. 460 
statistical discrepancy, p. 464 
surplus of government enterprises, p. 464 
value added, p. 458 
weight, p. 467 
Equations:  
Expenditure approach to GDP:  
GDP = C + I + G + (EX - IM), p. 460 
GDP = Final sales + Change in business 
inventories, p. 462 
capitalend of period = capitalbeginning of period 
+ net investment, p. 463 
474 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
P R O b L e M S 
Similar problems are available on Myeconlab.
21.1 GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
Learning Objective: Describe GDP fundamentals and 
differentiate between GDP and GNP.
 1.1 Explain what double counting is and discuss why GDP is 
not equal to total sales.
 1.2 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 461] Which 
of the following transactions or activities would be 
counted in your country’s GDP? Explain your answers.
a. A transportation company acquires a fleet of second-hand 
vehicles.
b. The same transportation company acquires 1.000 gallons 
of gas from a foreign company deducted from the net 
 export component of GDP.
c. You buy 10 short-term government bonds.
d. A mining company acquires new government licenses to 
drill in land the company already owns.
e. You pay for a new haircut at your local hairdresser.
f. Foreign residents buy a bundle of your country’s food 
 specialties on an online retail site.
g. Your parents spend a whole day cooking meals to be 
handed out to their poorer neighbors.
h. The local government acquires furniture for newly built 
schools.
i. Two telecommunications companies merge.
j. A non-profit organization buys an apartment to lodge 
their headquarters.
k. You receive a large sum of money as bequest from a dead 
relative.
 1.3 Jacques, a resident of France, goes to Germany to buy 
a brand-new car for €15,600.00. He then brings the 
car back to France and sells it to another resident for 
€17,500.00. Which amount will be included in which 
country’s GDP, deducted from the net export compo-
nent of GDP?
 1.4 Anissa makes custom bird houses in her garage and she 
buys all her supplies from a local lumber yard. Last year 
she purchased $3,500 worth of supplies and produced 
250 bird houses. She sold all 250 bird houses to a local 
craft store for $25 each. The craft store sold all the bird 
houses to customers for $55 each. For the total bird 
house production, calculate the value added of Anissa 
and of the craft store.
21.2 CALCULATING GDP
Learning Objective: Explain two methods for calculating GDP.
 2.1 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 466] In 
a simple economy, suppose that all income is either 
compensation of employees or profits. Suppose also 
that there are no indirect taxes. Calculate gross domestic 
product from the following set of numbers. Show that the 
expenditure approach and the income approach add up to 
the same figure.
Consumption
$9,500
Investment
3,000
Depreciation
1,750
Profits
2,400
Exports
850
Compensation of employees
11,500
Government purchases
3,200
Direct taxes
1,200
Saving
1,600
Imports
900
 2.2 How do we know that calculating GDP by the 
 expenditure approach yields the same answer as 
 calculating GDP by the income approach?
 2.3 During 2002, real GDP in Japan rose about  
1.3 percent. During the same period, retail sales in 
Japan fell 1.8 percent in real terms. What are some  
possible  explanations for retail sales to consumers  
falling when GDP rises? (Hint: Think of the  
composition of GDP using the expenditure  
approach.)
 2.4 If you buy a new car, the entire purchase is counted 
as consumption in the year in which you make the 
transaction. Explain briefly why this is in one sense 
an “error” in national income accounting. (Hint: How 
is the purchase of a car different from the purchase of 
a pizza?) How might you correct this error? How is 
housing treated in the National Income and Product 
Accounts? Specifically how does owner-occupied 
housing enter into the  accounts? (Hint: Do some 
Web searching on “imputed rent on owner-occupied 
housing.”)
 2.5 Explain why imports are subtracted in the expenditure 
approach to calculating GDP.
 2.6 Beginning in 2005, the housing market, which had been 
booming for years, turned. Housing construction 
dropped sharply in 2006. Go to www.bea.gov. Look 
at the GDP  release and at past releases from 2005 to 
2015. In real dollars, how much private  residential fixed 
 investment (houses, apartments, condominiums, and 
 cooperatives) took place in each quarter from 2005 to 
2015? What portion of GDP did housing  construction 
represent? After 2006, residential fixed investment was 
declining sharply, yet GDP was  growing until the end of 
2007. What categories of aggregate spending kept things 
moving between 2006 and the end of 2007?
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 475 
21.3 NOMINAL VERSUS REAL GDP
Learning Objective: Discuss the difference between real GDP 
and nominal GDP.
 3.1 The following table shows World Bank estimates for 
world GDP from 2005 to 2014, both in nominal and 
real terms (real GDP is calculated using a fixed weights 
method,  using 2005 as a base year). How do you explain 
the  discrepancy between nominal and real GDP in 2014? 
How do you explain the evolution of world’s real GDP 
growth rate from 2005 to 2014?
years
World GDP 
(constant 
2005 US$, 
million)
World  
GDP ( current 
US$, million)
% change in 
real GDP
% change in 
 nominal  
GDP
2005
47.033,72 
47.033,72 
–
–
2006
48.971,44 
50.971,47 
4.1%
8.4%
2007
50.899,06 
57.452,22 
3.9%
12.7%
2008
51.652,20 
62.982,83 
1.5%
9.6%
2009
50.582,34 
59.704,69 
-2.1%
-5.2%
2010
52.646,04 
65.489,20 
4.1%
9.7%
2011
54.142,01 
72.572,25 
2.8%
10.8%
2012
55.351,86 
74.041,59 
2.2%
2.0%
2013
56.652,81 
76.123,95 
2.4%
2.8%
2014
58.054,82 
77.868,77 
2.5%
2.3%
 3.2 New Zealand recently changed its method of calculat-
ing real GDP growth rate, substituting fixed weights 
with chain weights. What might explain such change in 
method? Are the differences between the two methods 
significant?
 3.3 The following table gives some figures from forecasts of 
real GDP (in 2005 dollars) and population done in mid-
2014. According to the forecasts, approximately how 
much real growth will there be between 2018 and 2019? 
What is the per-capita real GDP projected to be in 2018 
and in 2019? Compute the forecast rate of change in real 
GDP and per-capita real GDP between 2018 and 2019.
Real GDP 2018 (billions)
$18,121
Real GDP 2019 (billions)
$18,375
Population 2018 (millions)
329.3
Population 2019 (millions)
331.9
 3.4 Look at a recent edition of The Economist. Go to the 
section on economic indicators. Go down the list of 
countries and make a list of the ones with the fastest 
and slowest GDP growth. Look also at the forecast rates 
of GDP growth. Go back to the table of contents at 
the beginning of the journal to see if there are articles 
about any of these countries. Write a paragraph or two 
 describing the events or the economic conditions in one 
of the countries. Explain why they are growing or not 
growing rapidly.
 3.5 In the IMF’s Regional Economic Survey on the Asia-
Pacific Region (available at www.imf.org) it is expected 
that the growth outlook for the region in 2015 is “stable 
and robust”, with an estimated average GDP growth rate 
of 5.5%, a much higher rate than in other parts of the 
world (especially Western Europe). Building on data from 
this survey and your own research, compare this rate to 
the GDP growth rate obtained in the past few years. How 
do you assess this evolution of the GDP growth rate in the 
region in terms of recession and expansion? What may be 
the causes of such slowdown?
 3.6 Gorgonzola is a small island nation with a simple economy 
that produces only six goods: sugar cane, yo-yos, rum, 
peanuts, harmonicas, and peanut butter. Assume that one-
quarter of all the sugar cane is used to produce rum and one-
half of all the peanuts are used to produce peanut butter.
a. Use the production and price information in the table to 
calculate nominal GDP for 2015.
b. Use the production and price information in the table to 
calculate real GDP for 2013, 2014, and 2015 using 2013 as 
the base year. What is the growth rate of real GDP from 
2013 to 2014 and from 2014 to 2015?
c. Use the production and price information in the table to 
calculate real GDP for 2013, 2014, and 2015 using 2014 as 
the base year. What is the growth rate of real GDP from 
2013 to 2014 and from 2014 to 2015?
2013
2014
2015
Product
Quantity Price
Quantity Price Quantity Price
Sugar cane
240
$0.80
240
$1.00
300
$1.15
Yo-yos
600
 2.50
700
 3.00
750
 4.00
Rum
150
10.00
160
12.00
180
15.00
Peanuts
500
 2.00
450
 2.50
450
 2.50
Harmonicas
 75
25.00
 75
30.00
 85
30.00
Peanut butter
100
 4.50
 85
 4.50
 85
 5.00
 3.7 Below is data on Germany’s GDP extracted from 
Eurostat, the European Union’s statistical office, for the 
period 2005–2014. Real GDP is calculated with a fixed 
weight method and 2005 as the base year. Fill the table 
by calculating (i) the GDP deflator for each year; (ii) the 
change in price level, in percentage terms.
Real GDP
Nominal 
GDP
GDP 
deflator
% change 
in price 
level
2005
2.297,82 
2.297,82 
2006
2.383,07 
2.390,20 
2007
2.460,99 
2.510,11 
2008
2.486,88 
2.558,02 
2009
2.346,67 
2.456,66 
2010
2.442,67 
2.576,22 
2011
2.530,36 
2.699,10 
2012
2.539,89
2.749,90 
2013
2.542,58 
2.809,48
2014
2.583,37
2.903,79
 3.8 Evaluate the following statement: Even if the prices of 
a large number of goods and services in the economy 
increase dramatically, the real GDP for the economy can 
still fall, but if the prices of a large number of goods and 
services in the economy decrease dramatically, the real 
GDP for the economy cannot rise.
