MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
456 part IV Concepts and problems in macroeconomics 
labor market. What is measured along the demand curve? 
What factors determine the quantity of labor demanded 
during a given period? What is measured along the labor 
supply curve? What factors determine the quantity of la-
bor supplied by households during a given period? What 
is the opportunity cost of holding a job?
 1.3 According to Eurostat, the European Union (EU) statisti-
cal office, the unemployment rate in the EU (composed 
of 28 countries) has steadily increased in the years follow-
ing the 2007–08 global financial crisis, from a low of 7 
percent in 2007 to a peak of 10.9 percent in 2013, with a 
small reversal in 2014. Yet the average growth rate in the 
EU 28 countries has followed a much less regular path, 
decreasing from a peak of 3.1 percent in 2007 to a low 
of -4.4 percent in 2009 (a recessionary year), returning 
positive in 2010 and 2011 (respectively, 2.1 percent and 
1.7 percent), but turning negative again in 2012 (-0.5 
percent), then slightly positive in 2013 (0.2 percent) and 
slightly accelerating in 2014 (1.4 percent). How can you 
explain these contrasting trends?
 1.4 Describe the state of the economy in the country where 
you live, both in dynamic terms—comparing this year with 
the last few years—and in comparative terms, with other 
countries of a similar income category. Is economic growth 
strong or weak? Is unemployment high or low? Is inflation 
excessive or not? How have economic growth, unemploy-
ment and inflation evolved over the past few years?
 1.5 Explain briefly how macroeconomics is different from 
microeconomics. How can macroeconomists use micro-
economic theory to guide them in their work, and why 
might they want to do so?
 1.6 A 2001 study by Berndt and Rappaport found that 
between 1976 and 1999, the average price of desktop 
computers in the United States had declined such that 
the 1999 price was only 0.069 percent of the 1976 price – 
a 1,445-fold decrease over a twenty-three year period. 
Does this imply that U.S. consumers’ purchasing power 
has increased 1,445 times during the same period? What 
do increases or decreases in individual goods’ price levels 
tell us about inflation? About consumers’ purchasing 
power?
20.2 tHe Components oF tHe 
maCroeConomy
Learning Objective: Discuss the interaction between the four 
components of the macroeconomy.
 2.1 Several member states of the European Union have 
 adopted, since 2009–10, contractionary fiscal policy 
 measures consisting of cuts in government spending 
and increases in taxation. These policies, often dubbed 
 “austerity” policies by their opponents, have led the 
latter to question their opportunity in a context of slow 
 economic growth and high unemployment. Why?
 2.2 In which market arenas can each of the following goods 
and services be traded?
a. A government bond.
b. A haircut at your local hairdresser.
c. Your skills as an economist.
d. A pair of second-hand shoes at the local market.
e. The average goals scored by a famous soccer player.
f. An insurance contract for your car.
20.3 a brieF History oF maCroeConomiCs
Learning Objective: Summarize the macroeconomic history of 
the United States between 1929 and 1970.
 3.1 Many of the expansionary periods during the twentieth 
century occurred during wars. Why do you think this is 
true?
 3.2 John Maynard Keynes was the first to show that govern-
ment policy could be used to change aggregate output 
and prevent recession by stabilizing the economy. 
Describe the economy of the world at the time Keynes 
was writing. Describe the economy of the United States 
today. What measures are being proposed by poten-
tial presidential candidates for the election of 2016 
to stimulate growth in the economy? Do any of these 
proposed policies follow the policies proposed by John 
Maynard Keynes? If so, which policies and from which 
candidates?
 3.3 Assume that the demand for flight attendants increases 
significantly as a result of an increase in demand for air 
travel. Explain what will happen to unemployment using 
both classical and Keynesian reasoning.
 3.4 Explain why the length and severity of the Great 
Depression necessitated a fundamental rethinking of 
the operations of the macroeconomy.
20.4 tHe U.s. eConomy sinCe 1970
Learning Objective: Describe the U.S. Economy Since 1970.
 4.1 The Economics in Practice describes prosperity and 
 recession as they are depicted in literature. Looking at 
data on GDP growth released by the Organization for 
Economic Cooperation and Development in its Interim 
Economic Outlook (available at http://www.oecd.org/
eco/outlook/economicoutlook.htm), how would you 
compare the economic performance of “emerging 
 markets” such as Brazil, China and Russia with respect 
to advanced  industrial economies such as Germany, the 
United Kingdom and the United States over the past year 
or two? Are these economies expanding or shrinking?
457 
21 
We saw in the last chapter that macroeconomics is concerned with aggregate output, 
 unemployment, and inflation. In this chapter, we discuss the measurement of aggregate output 
and inflation. In the next chapter, we discuss the measurement of unemployment. Accurate 
measures of these variables are critical for understanding the economy. Without good measures, 
economists would have a hard time analyzing how the economy works and policy makers would 
have little to guide them on which policies are best for the economy.
Much of the macroeconomic data we use come from the national income and product 
 accounts, which are compiled by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the U.S. Department 
of Commerce. It is hard to overestimate the importance of these accounts. They are, in fact, 
one of the great inventions of the twentieth century. (See the Economics in Practice, p. 466.) They 
not only convey data about the performance of the economy but also provide a conceptual 
 framework that macroeconomists use to think about how the pieces of the economy fit together. 
When economists think about the macroeconomy, the categories and vocabulary they use come 
from the national income and product accounts.
The national income and product accounts can be compared with the mechanical or  wiring 
diagrams for an automobile engine. The diagrams do not explain how an engine works, but 
they identify the key parts of an engine and show how they are connected. Trying to understand 
the macroeconomy without understanding national income accounting is like trying to fix an 
 engine without a mechanical diagram and with no names for the engine parts.
Measuring National 
Output and National 
Income
Chapter Outline 
and learning 
ObjeCtives 
21.1 Gross Domestic 
Product p. 458
Describe GDP funda-
mentals and differentiate 
 between GDP and GNP.
21.2 Calculating 
GDP p. 460
Explain two methods for 
calculating GDP.
21.3 Nominal versus 
Real GDP p. 465
Discuss the difference 
 between real GDP and 
nominal GDP.
21.4 Limitations of 
the GDP Concept  
p. 470
Discuss the limitations 
of using GDP to measure 
well-being.
Looking Ahead p. 472
458 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
There are literally thousands of variables in the national income and product accounts. In 
this chapter, we discuss only the most important. This chapter is meant to convey the way the 
national income and product accounts represent or organize the economy and the sizes of the 
various pieces of the economy.
Gross Domestic Product
The key concept in the national income and product accounts is gross domestic product (GDP).
national income and product 
accounts Data collected and 
published by the government 
describing the various compo-
nents of national income and 
output in the economy.
21.1 Learning Objective
Describe GDP fundamentals 
and differentiate between  
GDP and GNP.
gross domestic product 
(GDP) The total market 
value of all final goods and 
 services produced within a 
given period by factors of 
 production located within  
a country.
Table 21.1  Value added in the Production of a Gallon  
of Gasoline (Hypothetical Numbers)
Stage of Production
Value of Sales
Value Added
(1) Oil drilling
$3.00
$3.00
(2) Refining
 3.30
 0.30
(3) Shipping
 3.60
 0.30
(4) Retail sale
 4.00
 0.40
Total value added
$4.00
GDP is the total market value of a country’s output. It is the market value of all final goods 
and services produced within a given period of time by factors of production located 
within a country.
U.S. GDP for 2014—the value of all output produced by factors of production in the United 
States in 2014—was $17,418.9 billion.
GDP is a critical concept. Just as an individual firm needs to evaluate the success or failure 
of its operations each year, so the economy as a whole needs to assess itself. GDP, as a measure of 
the total production of an economy, provides us with a country’s economic report card. Because 
GDP is so important, we need to take time to explain exactly what its definition means.
Final Goods and Services
First, note that the definition refers to final goods and services. Many goods produced in the 
economy are not classified as final goods, but instead as intermediate goods. Intermediate goods 
are produced by one firm for use in further processing or for resale by another firm. For example, 
tires sold to automobile manufacturers are intermediate goods. The chips that go in Apple’s 
iPhone are also intermediate goods. The value of intermediate goods is not counted in GDP.
Why are intermediate goods not counted in GDP? Suppose that in producing a car, General 
Motors (GM) pays $200 to Goodyear for tires. GM uses these tires (among other components) 
to assemble a car, which it sells for $24,000. The value of the car (including its tires) is $24,000, 
not $24,000 + $200. The final price of the car already reflects the value of all its components. 
To count in GDP both the value of the tires sold to the automobile manufacturers and the value 
of the automobiles sold to the consumers would result in double counting. It would also lead us 
to conclude that a decision by GM to produce its own tires rather than buy them from Goodyear 
leads to a reduction in the value of goods produced by the economy.
Double counting can also be avoided by counting only the value added to a product by each 
firm in its production process. The value added during some stage of production is the differ-
ence between the value of goods as they leave that stage of production and the cost of the goods 
as they entered that stage. Value added is illustrated in Table 21.1. The four stages of the produc-
tion of a gallon of gasoline are: (1) oil drilling, (2) refining, (3) shipping, and (4) retail sale. In the 
first stage, value added is the value of the crude oil. In the second stage, the refiner purchases 
the oil from the driller, refines it into gasoline, and sells it to the shipper. The refiner pays the 
driller $3.00 per gallon and charges the shipper $3.30. The value added by the refiner is thus 
final goods and services  
Goods and services produced 
for final use.
intermediate goods Goods 
that are produced by one firm 
for use in further processing or 
for resale by another firm.
value added The difference 
between the value of goods as 
they leave a stage of produc-
tion and the cost of the goods 
as they entered that stage.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 459 
$0.30 per gallon. The shipper then sells the gasoline to retailers for $3.60. The value added in the 
third stage of production is $0.30. Finally, the retailer sells the gasoline to consumers for $4.00. 
The value added at the fourth stage is $0.40, and the total value added in the production process 
is $4.00, the same as the value of sales at the retail level. Adding the total values of sales at each 
stage of production ($3.00 + $3.30 + $3.60 + $4.00 = $13.90) would significantly overesti-
mate the value of the gallon of gasoline.
In calculating GDP, we can sum up the value added at each stage of production or we 
can take the value of final sales. We do not use the value of total sales in an economy to 
 measure how much output has been produced.
Exclusion of Used Goods and Paper Transactions
GDP is concerned only with new, or current, production. Old output is not counted in current 
GDP because it was already counted when it was produced. It would be double counting to 
count sales of used goods in current GDP. If someone sells a used car to you, the transaction is 
not counted in GDP because no new production has taken place. Similarly, a house is counted in 
GDP only at the time it is built, not each time it is resold. In short:
GDP does not count transactions in which money or goods changes hands and in which 
no new goods and services are produced.
Sales of stocks and bonds are not counted in GDP. These exchanges are transfers of 
 ownership of assets, either electronically or through paper exchanges, and do not correspond to 
current production. What if you sell the stock or bond for more than you originally paid for it? 
Profits from the stock or bond market have nothing to do with current production, so they are 
not counted in GDP. However, if you pay a fee to a broker for selling a stock of yours to someone 
else, this fee is counted in GDP because the broker is performing a service for you. This service 
is part of current production. Be careful to distinguish between exchanges of stocks and bonds 
for money (or for other stocks and bonds), which do not involve current production, and fees for 
performing such exchanges, which do.
Exclusion of Output Produced Abroad by Domestically 
Owned Factors of Production
GDP is the value of output produced by factors of production located within a country.
The three basic factors of production are land, labor, and capital. The output produced by U.S. 
citizens abroad—for example, U.S. citizens working for a foreign company—is not counted in 
U.S. GDP because the output is not produced within the United States. Likewise, profits earned 
abroad by U.S. companies are not counted in U.S. GDP. However, the output produced by 
 foreigners working in the United States is counted in U.S. GDP because the output is produced 
within the United States. Also, profits earned in the United States by foreign-owned companies 
are counted in U.S. GDP.
It is sometimes useful to have a measure of the output produced by factors of production 
owned by a country’s citizens regardless of where the output is produced. This measure is called 
gross national product (GNP). For most countries, including the United States, the difference 
between GDP and GNP is small. In 2014, GNP for the United States was $17,630.6 billion, which 
is close to the $17,418.9 billion value for U.S. GDP.
The distinction between GDP and GNP can be tricky. Consider the Honda plant in 
Marysville, Ohio. The plant is owned by the Honda Corporation, a Japanese firm, but most 
gross national product (GNP)  
The total market value of 
all final goods and  services 
 produced within a given period 
by factors of  production 
owned by a country’s citizens, 
 regardless of where the output 
is produced.
460 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
of the workers employed at the plant are U.S. workers. Although all the output of the plant is 
included in U.S. GDP, only part of it is included in U.S. GNP. The wages paid to U.S. workers 
are part of U.S. GNP, whereas the profits from the plant are not. The profits from the plant 
are counted in Japanese GNP because this is output produced by Japanese-owned factors of 
 production (Japanese capital in this case). The profits, however, are not counted in Japanese 
GDP because they were not earned in Japan.
Calculating GDP
GDP can be computed two ways. One way is to add up the total amount spent on all final goods 
and services during a given period. This is the expenditure approach to calculating GDP. The other 
way is to add up the income—wages, rents, interest, and profits—received by all factors of produc-
tion in producing final goods and services. This is the income approach to calculating GDP. These 
two methods lead to the same value for GDP for the reason we discussed in the  previous chapter: 
Every payment (expenditure) by a buyer is at the same time a receipt (income) for the seller. We can measure 
either income received or expenditures made, and we will end up with the same total output.
Suppose the economy is made up of just one firm and the firm’s total output this year sells 
for $1 million. Because the total amount spent on output this year is $1 million, this year’s GDP 
is $1 million. (Remember: The expenditure approach calculates GDP on the basis of the total 
amount spent on final goods and services in the economy.) However, every one of the million 
 dollars of GDP either is paid to someone or remains with the owners of the firm as profit. Using 
the income approach, we add up the wages paid to employees of the firm, the interest paid to 
those who lent money to the firm, and the rents paid to those who leased land, buildings, or 
equipment to the firm. What is left over is profit, which is, of course, income to the owners 
of the firm. If we add up the incomes of all the factors of production, including profits to the 
 owners, we get a GDP of $1 million.
The Expenditure Approach
Recall from the previous chapter the four main groups in the economy: households, firms, the 
government, and the rest of the world. There are also four main categories of expenditure:
■
■Personal consumption expenditures (C): household spending on consumer goods
■
■Gross private domestic investment (I): spending by firms and households on new capital, 
that is, plant, equipment, inventory, and new residential structures
■
■Government consumption and gross investment (G)
■
■Net exports (EX - IM): net spending by the rest of the world, or exports (EX) minus 
imports (IM)
The expenditure approach calculates GDP by adding together these four components of 
spending. It is shown here in equation form:
21.2 Learning Objective
Explain two methods for 
 calculating GDP.
expenditure approach A 
method of computing GDP 
that measures the total 
amount spent on all final 
goods and services during a 
given period.
income approach A method 
of computing GDP that mea-
sures the income—wages, rents, 
interest, and profits—received 
by all factors of production 
in producing final goods and 
services.
GDP = C + I + G + (EX - IM)
U.S. GDP was $17,418.9 billion in 2014. The four components of the expenditure approach 
are shown in Table 21.2, along with their various categories. 
Personal Consumption Expenditures (C) The largest part of GDP consists of personal 
consumption expenditures (C). Table 21.2 shows that in 2014, the amount of personal consump-
tion expenditures accounted for 68.5 percent of GDP. These are expenditures by consumers on 
goods and services.
There are three main categories of consumer expenditures: durable goods, nondurable 
goods, and services. Durable goods, such as automobiles, furniture, and household appliances, 
last a relatively long time. Nondurable goods, such as food, clothing, gasoline, and cigarettes, 
are used up fairly quickly. Payments for services—those things we buy that do not involve the 
personal consumption 
 expenditures (C)  
Expenditures by consumers  
on goods and services.
durable goods Goods that 
last a relatively long time, 
such as cars and household 
appliances.
nondurable goods Goods 
that are used up fairly quickly, 
such as food and clothing.
services The things we buy 
that do not involve the produc-
tion of physical things, such as 
legal and medical services and 
education.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 461 
Table 21.2 Components of U.S. GDP, 2014: The expenditure approach
Note: Numbers may not add exactly because of rounding.
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015.
Billions of Dollars ($)
Percentage of GDP (%)
Personal consumption expenditures (C)
11,930.3
 68.5
 Durable goods
1,302.5
 7.5
 Nondurable goods
2,666.2
15.3
 Services
7,961.7
45.7
Gross private domestic investment (I)
 2,851.6
 16.4
 Nonresidential
2,210.5
12.7
 Residential
  559.1
 3.2
 Change in business inventories
   82.0
 0.5
Government consumption and gross investment (G)  3,175.2
 18.2
 Federal
1,219.2
 7.0
 State and local
1,956.1
11.2
Net exports (EX - IM) 
 −538.2
 −3.1
 Exports (EX
2,337.0
13.4
 Imports (IM)
      
2,875.2
    
16.5
Gross domestic product
17,418.9
100.0
E con o m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
Where Does eBay Get Counted?
eBay runs an online marketplace with more than 220  million 
registered users who buy and sell 2.4 billion items a year, rang-
ing from children’s toys to oil paintings. In December 2007, one 
eBay user auctioned off a 1933 Chicago World’s Fair pennant. 
The winning bid was slightly more than $20.
eBay is traded on the New York Stock Exchange, employs 
hundreds of people, and has a market value of about $40 billion. 
With regard to eBay, what do you think gets counted as part of 
current GDP?
That 1933 pennant, for example, does not get counted. The 
production of that pennant was counted back in 1933. The 
many cartons of K’nex bricks sent from one home to another 
don’t count either. Their value was counted when the bricks 
were first produced. What about a newly minted Scrabble 
game? One of the interesting features of eBay is that it has 
changed from being a market in which individuals  market 
their hand-me-downs to a place that small and even large 
businesses use as a sales site. The value of the new Scrabble 
game would be counted as part of this year’s GDP if it were 
produced this year.
So do any of eBay’s services count as part of GDP? eBay’s 
business is to provide a marketplace for exchange. In doing 
so, it uses labor and capital and creates value. In return for 
creating this value, eBay charges fees to the sellers that use 
its site. The value of these fees does enter into GDP. So 
although the old knickknacks that people sell on eBay do 
ThiNkiNG PrAcTicAlly
1. John has a 2009 honda civic. in 2013, he sells it to 
Mary for $10,000. is that $10,000 counted in the 
GDP for 2013?
2. if John is an automobile dealer, does that change 
your answer to Question 1 at all?
not contribute to current GDP, the cost of finding an inter-
ested buyer for those old goods does indeed get counted.
production of physical items—include expenditures for doctors, lawyers, and educational institu-
tions. As Table 21.2 shows, in 2014, durable goods expenditures accounted for 7.5 percent of GDP, 
nondurables for 15.3 percent, and services for 45.7 percent. Almost half of GDP is now service 
consumption.
462 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
Gross Private Domestic Investment (I) Investment, as we use the term in economics, 
refers to the purchase of new capital—housing, plants, equipment, and inventory. The economic 
use of the term is in contrast to its everyday use, where investment often refers to purchases of 
stocks, bonds, or mutual funds.
Total investment in capital by the private sector is called gross private domestic 
 investment (I). Expenditures by firms for machines, tools, plants, and so on make up 
 nonresidential investment.1 Because these are goods that firms buy for their own final use, 
they are part of “final sales” and counted in GDP. Expenditures for new houses and  apartment 
 buildings constitute residential investment. The third component of gross  private domestic 
investment, the change in business inventories, is the amount by which firms’  inventories 
change during a period. Business inventories can be looked at as the goods that firms 
 produce now but intend to sell later. In 2014, gross private domestic investment accounted 
for 16.4 percent of GDP. Of that, 12.7 percent was nonresidential investment, 3.2 percent was 
 residential investment, and 0.5 percent was change in business inventories.
Change in Business Inventories 
Why is the change in business inventories considered a 
component of investment—the purchase of new capital? To run a business most firms hold 
inventories, in part because they cannot predict exactly how much will be sold each day and 
want to avoid losing sales by running out of a product. Inventories—goods produced for later 
sale—are counted as capital because they produce value in the future. An increase in inventories 
is an increase in capital.
Regarding GDP, remember that it is not the market value of total final sales during the 
period, but rather the market value of total final production. The relationship between total 
 production and total sales is as follows:
gross private domestic invest-
ment (I) Total investment in 
capital—that is, the  purchase 
of new housing, plants, 
 equipment, and inventory by 
the private (or nongovern-
ment) sector.
nonresidential investment  
Expenditures by firms for 
machines, tools, plants, and 
so on.
1 The distinction between what is considered investment and what is considered consumption is sometimes fairly arbitrary.  
A firm’s purchase of a car or a truck is counted as investment, but a household’s purchase of a car or a truck is counted 
as  consumption of durable goods. In general, expenditures by firms for items that last longer than a year are counted as 
 investment expenditures. Expenditures for items that last less than a year are seen as purchases of intermediate goods.
residential investment  
Expenditures by households 
and firms on new houses and 
apartment buildings.
change in business inventories  
The amount by which firms’ 
inventories change during a 
period. inventories are the 
goods that firms produce now 
but intend to sell later.
Total production (GDP) equals final sales of domestic goods plus the change in business 
inventories. In 2014, production in the United States was larger than sales by $82.0 billion. The 
stock of inventories at the end of 2014 was $82.0 billion larger than it was at the end of 2013—the 
change in business inventories was $82.0 billion.
Gross Investment versus Net Investment 
During the process of production, capital 
(especially machinery and equipment) produced in previous periods gradually wears out. 
GDP includes newly produced capital goods but does not take account of capital goods 
“consumed” in the production process. As a result, GDP overstates the real production of an 
economy because it does not account for the part of that production that serves just to replace 
worn out capital.
The amount by which an asset’s value falls each period is called its depreciation.2 A per-
sonal computer purchased by a business today may be expected to have a useful life of 4 years 
before becoming worn out or obsolete. Over that period, the computer steadily depreciates.
What is the relationship between gross investment (I) and depreciation? Gross investment 
is the total value of all newly produced capital goods (plant, equipment, housing, and inventory) 
produced in a given period. It takes no account of the fact that some capital wears out and must 
be replaced. Net investment is equal to gross investment minus depreciation. Net investment 
is a measure of how much the stock of capital changes during a period. Positive net investment 
means that the amount of new capital produced exceeds the amount that wears out, and nega-
tive net investment means that the amount of new capital produced is less than the amount that 
wears out. Therefore, if net investment is positive, the capital stock has increased, and if net 
depreciation The amount by 
which an asset’s value falls in  
a given period.
2 This is the formal definition of economic depreciation. Because depreciation is difficult to measure precisely, accounting rules 
allow firms to use shortcut methods to approximate the amount of depreciation that they incur each period. To complicate 
matters even more, the U.S. tax laws allow firms to deduct depreciation for tax purposes under a different set of rules.
gross investment The total 
value of all newly produced 
capital goods (plant, equip-
ment, housing, and inventory) 
produced in a given period.
net investment Gross 
 investment minus depreciation.
GDP = Final sales + Change in business inventories
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 463 
Government Consumption and Gross Investment (G) 
Government consumption 
and gross investment (G) include expenditures by federal, state, and local governments for 
final goods (bombs, pencils, school buildings) and services (military salaries, congressional 
salaries, school teachers’ salaries). Some of these expenditures are counted as government 
consumption, and some are counted as government gross investment. Government transfer 
payments (Social Security benefits, veterans’ disability stipends, and so on) are not included in 
G because these transfers are not purchases of anything currently produced. The payments are 
not made in exchange for any goods or services. Because interest payments on the government 
debt are also counted as transfers, they are excluded from GDP on the grounds that they are not 
payments for current goods or services.
As Table 21.2 shows, government consumption and gross investment accounted for 
$3,175.2 billion, or 18.2 percent of U.S. GDP, in 2014. Federal government consumption and 
gross investment accounted for 7.0 percent of GDP, and state and local government consump-
tion and gross investment accounted for 11.2 percent.
Net Exports (EX - IM) 
The value of net exports (EX - IM) is the difference between 
 exports (sales to foreigners of U.S.-produced goods and services) and imports (U.S. purchases of 
goods and services from abroad). This figure can be positive or negative. In 2014, the United 
States exported less than it imported, so the level of net exports was negative (-$538.2 billion). 
Before 1976, the United States was generally a net exporter—exports exceeded imports, so the 
net export figure was positive.
The reason for including net exports in the definition of GDP is simple. Consumption, 
investment, and government spending (C, I, and G, respectively) include expenditures on goods 
produced at home and abroad. Therefore, C + I + G overstates domestic production because 
it contains expenditures on foreign-produced goods—that is, imports (IM), which have to be 
subtracted from GDP to obtain the correct figure. At the same time, C + I + G understates 
domestic production because some of what a nation produces is sold abroad and therefore is 
not included in C, I, or G—exports (EX) have to be added in. If a U.S. firm produces computers 
and sells them in Germany, the computers are part of U.S. production and should be counted 
as part of U.S. GDP.
The Income Approach
We now turn to calculating GDP using the income approach, which looks at GDP in terms of 
who receives it as income rather than as who purchases it.
We begin with the concept of national income, which is defined in Table 21.3. National 
income is the sum of eight income items. Compensation of employees, the largest of the eight 
items by far, includes wages and salaries paid to households by firms and by the government, as 
well as various supplements to wages and salaries such as contributions that employers make to 
social insurance and private pension funds. Proprietors’ income is the income of unincorpo-
rated businesses. Rental income, a minor item, is the income received by property owners in the 
form of rent. Corporate profits, the second-largest item of the eight, is the income of corpora-
tions. Net interest is the interest paid by business. (Interest paid by households and the govern-
ment is not counted in GDP because it is not assumed to flow from the production of goods and 
services.)
The sixth item, indirect taxes minus subsidies, includes taxes such as sales taxes, customs 
duties, and license fees less subsidies that the government pays for which it receives no goods or 
services in return. (Subsidies are like negative taxes.) The value of indirect taxes minus subsidies 
is thus net revenue received by the government. Net business transfer payments are net transfer 
government consumption  
and gross investment (G)  
Expenditures by federal, state, 
and local governments for final 
goods and services.
net exports (EX - IM) The 
difference between exports 
(sales to foreigners of U.S.- 
produced goods and services) 
and imports (U.S. purchases 
of goods and services from 
abroad). The figure can be 
positive or negative.
national income The total 
income earned by the factors 
of production owned by a 
country’s citizens.
compensation of employees  
includes wages, salaries, and 
various supplements—employer 
contributions to social insur-
ance and pension funds, for 
example—paid to households 
by firms and by the government.
proprietors’ income The 
income of unincorporated 
businesses.
rental income The income 
received by property owners  
in the form of rent.
corporate profits The income 
of corporations.
net interest The interest paid 
by business.
indirect taxes minus subsidies  
Taxes such as sales taxes, cus-
toms duties, and license fees 
less subsidies that the govern-
ment pays for which it receives 
no goods or services in return. 
is net revenue received by the 
government.
net business transfer payments  
Net transfer payments by busi-
nesses to others.
capitalend of period = capitalbeginning of period + net investment
investment is negative, the capital stock has decreased. Put another way, the capital stock at the 
end of a period is  equal to the capital stock that existed at the beginning of the period plus net 
investment:
464 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
payments by businesses to others and are thus income of others. The final item is the surplus of 
government enterprises, which is the income of government enterprises. Table 21.3 shows that 
this item was negative in 2014: government enterprises on net ran at a loss.
National income is the total income of the country, but it is not quite GDP. Table 21.4 shows 
what is involved in going from national income to GDP. Table 21.4 first shows that in moving from 
GDP to GNP, we need to add receipts of factor income from the rest of the world and subtract 
 payments of factor income to the rest of the world. National income is income of the country’s 
 citizens, not the income of the residents of the country. So we first need to move from GDP to 
GNP. This, as discussed previously, is a minor adjustment.
We then need to subtract depreciation from GNP, which is a large adjustment. GNP less depre-
ciation is called net national product (NNP). Why is depreciation subtracted? To see why, go back 
to the example previously in this chapter in which the economy is made up of just one firm and 
total output (GDP) for the year is $1 million. Assume that after the firm pays wages, interest, and 
rent, it has $100,000 left. Assume also that its capital stock depreciated by $40,000 during the year. 
National income includes corporate profits (see Table 21.3), and in calculating corporate profits, 
the $40,000 depreciation is subtracted from the $100,000, leaving profits of $60,000. So national 
income does not include the $40,000. When we calculate GDP using the expenditure approach, 
however,  depreciation is not subtracted. We simply add consumption, investment, government 
spending, and net exports. In our simple example, this is just $1 million. We thus must subtract 
depreciation from GDP (actually GNP when there is a rest-of-the-world sector) to get national 
income.
Table 21.4 shows that net national product and national income are the same except for a 
statistical discrepancy, a data measurement error. If the government were completely accurate 
in its data collection, the statistical discrepancy would be zero. The data collection, however, is 
not perfect, and the statistical discrepancy is the measurement error in each period. Table 21.4 
shows that in 2014, this error was $176.0 billion, which is small compared to national income of 
$15,070.4 billion.
surplus of government 
 enterprises income of 
 government enterprises.
net national product (NNP)  
Gross national product minus 
depreciation; a nation’s total 
product minus what is required 
to maintain the value of its 
capital stock.
statistical discrepancy Data 
measurement error.
Table 21.3 National Income, 2014
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015.
Billions of Dollars ($)
Percentage  
of National 
Inc ome (%)
National income
15,070.4
100.0
 Compensation of employees
9,221.6
61.2
 Proprietors’ income
1,380.2
 9.2
 Rental income
  640.2
 4.2
 Corporate profits
2,089.8
13.9
 Net interest
  486.3
 3.2
 Indirect taxes minus subsidies
1,145.8
 7.6
 Net business transfer payments
  140.6
 0.9
 Surplus of government enterprises
  −34.2
−0.2
Table 21.4 GDP, GNP, NNP, and National Income, 2014
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015.
Dollars  
($, Billions)
GDP
 17,418.9
 Plus: Receipts of factor income from the rest of the world
   +827.7
 Less: Payments of factor income to the rest of the world
    −616.0
Equals: GNP
 17,630.6
 Less: Depreciation
 −2,736.2
Equals: Net national product (NNP)
14,894.4
 Less: Statistical discrepancy
   −176.0
Equals: National income
 15,070.4
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 465 
We have so far seen from Table 21.3 the various income items that make up total national 
income, and we have seen from Table 21.4 how GDP and national income are related. A use-
ful way to think about national income is to consider how much of it goes to households. 
The total income of households is called personal income, and it turns out that almost all of 
national income is personal income. Table 21.5 shows that of the $15,070.4 billion in national 
income in 2014, $14,728.6 billion was personal income. The second line in Table 21.5, the 
amount of national income not going to households, includes the profits of corporations not 
paid to households in the form of dividends, called the retained earnings of corporations. This 
is income that stays inside corporations for some period rather than going to households, and 
so it is part of national income but not personal income.
Personal income is the income received by households before they pay personal income 
taxes. The amount of income that households have to spend or save is called disposable 
 personal income, or after-tax income . It is equal to personal income minus personal income 
taxes, as shown in Table 21.5.
Because disposable personal income is the amount of income that households can spend or 
save, it is an important income concept. Table 21.5 shows there are three categories of spending: 
(1) personal consumption expenditures, (2) personal interest payments, and (3) transfer pay-
ments made by households. The amount of disposable personal income left after total personal 
spending is personal saving. If your monthly disposable income is $500 and you spend $450, 
you have $50 left at the end of the month. Your personal saving is $50 for the month. Your per-
sonal saving level can be negative: If you earn $500 and spend $600 during the month, you have 
dissaved $100. To spend $100 more than you earn, you will have to borrow the $100 from some-
one, take the $100 from your savings account, or sell an asset you own.
The personal saving rate is the percentage of disposable personal income saved, an impor-
tant indicator of household behavior. A low saving rate means households are spending a large 
fraction of their income. As Table 21.5 shows, the U.S. personal saving rate in 2014 was 4.8 
percent. Saving rates tend to rise during recessionary periods, when consumers become anxious 
about their future, and fall during boom times, as pent-up spending demand gets released. In 
2005 the saving rate got down to 2.5 percent.
Nominal versus Real GDP
We have thus far looked at GDP measured in current dollars, or the current prices we pay for 
goods and services. When we measure something in current dollars, we refer to it as a nominal 
value. Nominal GDP is GDP measured in current dollars—all components of GDP valued at 
their current prices.
In most applications in macroeconomics, however, nominal GDP is not what we are after. 
It is not a good measure of aggregate output over time. Why? Assume that there is only one 
personal income The total 
income of households.
disposable personal income 
or after-tax income Personal 
income minus personal income 
taxes. The amount that house-
holds have to spend or save.
personal saving The amount 
of disposable income that is 
left after total personal spend-
ing in a given period.
personal saving rate The 
percentage of disposable 
 personal income that is saved. 
if the personal saving rate is 
low, households are spending 
a large amount relative to their 
incomes; if it is high, house-
holds are spending cautiously.
21.3 Learning Objective
Discuss the difference between 
real GDP and nominal GDP.
current dollars The current 
prices that we pay for goods 
and services.
nominal GDP Gross domes-
tic product measured in 
 current dollars.
Table 21.5  National Income, Personal Income, Disposable Personal 
Income, and Personal Saving, 2014
Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, March 27, 2015.
Dollar 
(Billions, $)
National income
 15,070.4
 Less: Amount of national income not going to households
   −341.8
Equals: Personal income
 14,728.6
 Less: Personal income taxes
 −1,742.9
Equals: Disposable personal income
 12,985.8
 Less: Personal consumption expenditures
−11,930.3
    Personal interest payments
   −256.8
    Transfer payments made by households
   −170.3
Equals: Personal saving
    628.3
Personal saving as a percentage of disposable personal income:
     4.8%
466 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
E co n o m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
GDP: One of the Great Inventions of the 20th Century
As the 20th century drew to a close, the U.S. Department 
of Commerce embarked on a review of its achievements. At 
the conclusion of this review, the Department named the 
development of the national income and product accounts as 
“its achievement of the century.”
J. Steven Landefeld Director, Bureau 
of Economic Analysis
While the GDP and the rest of the national income accounts 
may seem to be arcane concepts, they are truly among the 
great inventions of the twentieth century.
Paul A. Samuelson and William D. Nordhaus
GDP! The right concept of economy-wide output, accurately 
measured. The U.S. and the world rely on it to tell where we 
are in the business cycle and to estimate long-run growth. 
It is the centerpiece of an elaborate and indispensable sys-
tem of social accounting, the national income and product 
accounts. This is surely the single most innovative achieve-
ment of the Commerce Department in the 20th century. I 
was fortunate to become an economist in the 1930’s when 
Kuznets, Nathan, Gilbert, and Jaszi were creating this most 
important set of economic time series. In economic the-
ory, macroeconomics was just beginning at the same time. 
Complementary, these two innovations deserve much credit 
for the improved performance of the economy in the second 
half of the century.
James Tobin
From the Survey of Current BuSineSS
Prior to the development of the NIPAs [national income and 
product accounts], policy makers had to guide the economy 
using limited and fragmentary information about the state of 
the economy. The Great Depression underlined the problems 
of incomplete data and led to the development of the national 
accounts:
One reads with dismay of Presidents Hoover and then 
Roosevelt designing policies to combat the Great Depression 
of the 1930s on the basis of such sketchy data as stock 
price indices, freight car loadings, and incomplete indices 
of industrial production. The fact was that comprehensive 
measures of national income and output did not exist at 
the time. The Depression, and with it the growing role of 
government in the economy, emphasized the need for such 
measures and led to the development of a comprehensive set 
of national income accounts.
Richard T. Froyen
In response to this need in the 1930s, the Department of 
Commerce commissioned Nobel laureate Simon Kuznets of 
ThiNkiNG PrAcTicAlly
1. The articles emphasize the importance of being able 
to measure an economy’s output to improve govern-
ment policy. looking at recent news, can you identify 
one economic policy debate or action that referenced 
GDP?
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economics, “GDP: One of the Great 
Inventions of the 20th Century,” Survey of Current Business, January 2000, pp. 6–9.
the National Bureau of Economic Research to develop a set of 
national economic accounts. . . . Professor Kuznets coordinated 
the work of researchers at the National Bureau of Economic 
Research in New York and his staff at Commerce. The original 
set of accounts was presented in a report to Congress in 1937 
and in a research report, National Income, 1929–35. . . .
The national accounts have become the mainstay of mod-
ern macroeconomic analysis, allowing policy makers, econo-
mists, and the business community to analyze the impact of 
different tax and spending plans, the impact of oil and other 
price shocks, and the impact of monetary policy on the econ-
omy as a whole and on specific components of final demand, 
incomes, industries, and regions.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 467 
good—say, pizza, which is the same quality year after year. In each year 1 and 2, one hundred 
units (slices) of pizza were produced. Production thus remained the same for year 1 and year 2. 
Suppose the price of pizza increased from $1.00 per slice in year 1 to $1.10 per slice in year 2. 
Nominal GDP in year 1 is $100 (100 units *  $1.00 per unit), and nominal GDP in year 2 is $110 
(100 units *  $1.10 per unit). Nominal GDP has increased by $10 even though no more slices 
of pizza were produced and the quality of the pizza did not improve. If we use nominal GDP to 
measure growth, we can be misled into thinking production has grown when all that has really 
happened is a rise in the price level (inflation).
If there were only one good in the economy—for example, pizza—it would be easy to mea-
sure production and compare one year’s value to another’s. We would add up all the pizza slices 
produced each year. In the example, production is 100 in both years. If the number of slices had 
increased to 105 in year 2, we would say production increased by 5 slices between year 1 and 
year 2, which is a 5 percent increase. Alas, however, there is more than one good in the economy 
which makes adjusting for price changes more complex.
The following is a discussion of how the BEA adjusts nominal GDP for price changes. As you 
read the discussion, you will see that this adjustment is not easy. Even in an economy of just apples 
and oranges, it would not be obvious how to add up apples and oranges to get an overall measure of 
output. The BEA’s task is to add up thousands of goods, each of whose price is changing over time.
In the following discussion, we will use the concept of a weight, either price weights or 
quantity weights. What is a weight? It is easiest to define the term by an example. Suppose in 
your economics course there is a final exam and two other tests. If the final exam counts for 
one-half of the grade and the other two tests for one-fourth each, the “weights” are one-half, 
one-fourth, and one-fourth. If instead the final exam counts for 80 percent of the grade and the 
other two tests for 10 percent each, the weights are 0.8, 0.1, and 0.1. The more important an item 
is in a group, the larger its weight.
Calculating Real GDP
Nominal GDP adjusted for price changes is called real GDP. All the main issues involved in com-
puting real GDP can be discussed using a simple three-good economy and 2 years. Table 21.6 
presents all the data that we will need. The table presents price and quantity data for 2 years and 
three goods. The goods are labeled A, B, and C, and the years are labeled 1 and 2. P denotes price, 
and Q denotes quantity. Keep in mind that everything in the following discussion, including 
the discussion of the GDP deflation, is based on the numbers in Table 21.6. Nothing has been 
brought in from the outside. The table is the entire economy.
The first thing to note from Table 21.6 is that nominal output—in current dollars—in year 
1 for good A is the number of units of good A produced in year 1 (6) times the price of good A 
in year 1 ($0.50), which is $3.00. Similarly, nominal output in year 1 is 7 *  $0.30 = $2.10 for 
good B and 10 *  $0.70 = $7.00 for good C. The sum of these three amounts, $12.10 in col-
umn 5, is nominal GDP in year 1 in this simple economy. Nominal GDP in year 2—calculated by 
weight The importance 
attached to an item within a 
group of items.
Table 21.6 a Three-Good economy
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
 
 
 
Production
 
 
 
Price per Unit
 
GDP in 
Year 1 in 
Year 1 
Prices 
P1 *  Q1 
 
GDP in 
Year 2 in 
Year 1 
Prices 
P1 *  Q2 
 
GDP in 
Year 1 in 
Year 2 
Prices 
P2 *  Q1 
 
GDP in 
Year 2 in 
Year 2 
Prices 
P2 *  Q2 
Year 1 
Q1
Year 2 
Q2
Year 1 
P1
Year 2 
P2
Good A
 6
11
$0.50
$0.40
$ 3.00
$  5.50
$  2.40
$  4.40
Good B
 7
 4
 0.30
 1.00
  2.10
  1.20
  7.00
  4.00
Good C
10
12
 0.70
 0.90
  7.00
  8.40
  9.00
 10.80
Total
$12.10
$15.10
$18.40
$19.20
Nominal 
GDP in 
year 1
Nominal 
GDP in 
year 2
468 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
using the year 2 quantities and the year 2 prices—is $19.20 (column 8). Nominal GDP has risen 
from $12.10 in year 1 to $19.20 in year 2, an increase of 58.7 percent.3
You can see that the price of each good changed between year 1 and year 2—the price of 
good A fell (from $0.50 to $0.40) and the prices of goods B and C rose (B from $0.30 to $1.00; C 
from $0.70 to $0.90). Some of the change in nominal GDP between years 1 and 2 is as a result 
of price changes and not production changes. How much can we attribute to price changes and 
how much to production changes? Here things get tricky. The procedure that the BEA used 
before 1996 was to pick a base year and to use the prices in that base year as weights to calculate 
real GDP. This is a fixed-weight procedure because the weights used, which are the prices, are 
the same for all years—namely, the prices that prevailed in the base year.
Let us use the fixed-weight procedure and year 1 as the base year, which means using year 1 
prices as the weights. Then in Table 21.6, real GDP in year 1 is $12.10 (column 5) and real GDP in 
year 2 is $15.10 (column 6). Note that both columns use year 1 prices and that nominal and real 
GDP are the same in year 1 because year 1 is the base year. Real GDP has increased from $12.10 
to $15.10, an increase of 24.8 percent.
Let us now use the fixed-weight procedure and year 2 as the base year, which means using 
year 2 prices as the weights. In Table 21.6, real GDP in year 1 is $18.40 (column 7) and real GDP 
in year 2 is $19.20 (column 8). Note that both columns use year 2 prices and that nominal and 
real GDP are the same in year 2, because year 2 is the base year. Real GDP has increased from 
$18.40 to $19.20, an increase of 4.3 percent.
This example shows that growth rates can be sensitive to the choice of the base year—24.8 
percent using year 1 prices as weights and 4.3 percent using year 2 prices as weights. For many 
policy decisions, the growth rates play a role so that large differences coming from a seemingly 
arbitrary choice of base year is troubling. The old BEA procedure simply picked one year as the 
base year and did all the calculations using the prices in that year as weights. The new BEA pro-
cedure makes two important changes. The first (using the current example) is to take the aver-
age of the two years’ price changes, in other words, to “split the difference” between 24.8 percent 
and 4.3 percent. What does “splitting the difference” mean? One way is to take the average of the 
two numbers, which is 14.55 percent. What the BEA does is to take the geometric average, which 
for the current example is 14.09 percent.4 These two averages (14.55 percent and 14.09 percent) 
are quite close, and the use of either would give similar results. The point here is not that the 
geometric average is used, but that the first change is to split the difference using some average. 
When prices are going up, this procedure will lower the estimates of real growth rates relative 
to the use of year 1 as a base year, and conversely when prices are falling. Note that this new 
procedure requires two “base” years because 24.8 percent was computed using year 1 prices as 
weights and 4.3 percent was computed using year 2 prices as weights.
The second BEA change is to use years 1 and 2 as the base years when computing the per-
centage change between years 1 and 2, then use years 2 and 3 as the base years when computing 
the percentage change between years 2 and 3, and so on. The two base years change as the cal-
culations move through time. The series of percentage changes computed this way is taken to be 
the series of growth rates of real GDP. So in this way, nominal GDP is adjusted for price changes. 
To make sure you understand this, review the calculations in Table 21.6, which provides all the 
data you need to see what is going on.
Calculating the GDP Deflator
We now switch gears from real GDP, a quantity measure, to the GDP deflator, a price measure. 
One of economic policy makers’ goals is to keep changes in the overall price level small. For this 
reason, policy makers not only need good measures of how real output is changing but also good 
measures of how the overall price level is changing. The GDP deflator is one measure of the overall 
price level. We can use the data in Table 21.6 to show how the BEA computes the GDP deflator.
In Table 21.6, the price of good A fell from $0.50 in year 1 to $0.40 in year 2, the price of 
good B rose from $0.30 to $1.00, and the price of good C rose from $0.70 to $0.90. If we are 
3 The percentage change is calculated as 3(19.20 - 12.10)>12.104 *  100 = .587 *  100 = 58.7 percent.
base year The year chosen for 
the weights in a fixed-weight 
procedure.
fixed-weight procedure A 
procedure that uses weights 
from a given base year.
4 The geometric average is computed as the square root of 124.8 *  104.3, which is 114.09.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 469 
interested only in how individual prices change, this is all the information we need. However, if 
we are interested in how the overall price level changes, we need to weight the individual prices in 
some way. Is it getting more expensive to live in this economy or less expensive? In this example 
that clearly depends on how people spend their incomes. So, the obvious weights to use are the 
quantities produced, but which quantities—those of year 1 or year 2? The same issues arise here 
for the quantity weights as for the price weights in computing real GDP.
Let us first use the fixed-weight procedure and year 1 as the base year, which means using 
year 1 quantities as the weights. Then in Table 21.6, the “bundle” price in year 1 is $12.10 (col-
umn 5) and the bundle price in year 2 is $18.40 (column 7). Both columns use year 1 quantities. 
The bundle price has increased from $12.10 to $18.40, an increase of 52.1 percent.
Next, use the fixed-weight procedure and year 2 as the base year, which means using year 
2 quantities as the weights. Then the bundle price in year 1 is $15.10 (column 6), and the bundle 
price in year 2 is $19.20 (column 8). Both columns use year 2 quantities. The bundle price has 
increased from $15.10 to $19.20, an increase of 27.2 percent.
This example shows that overall price increases can be sensitive to the choice of the base 
year: 52.1 percent using year 1 quantities as weights and 27.2 percent using year 2 quantities as 
weights. Again, the old BEA procedure simply picked one year as the base year and did all the 
calculations using the quantities in the base year as weights. First, the new procedure splits the 
difference between 52.1 percent and 27.2 percent by taking the geometric average, which is 39.1 
percent. Second, it uses years 1 and 2 as the base years when computing the percentage change 
between years 1 and 2, years 2 and 3 as the base years when computing the percentage change 
between years 2 and 3, and so on. The series of percentage changes computed this way is taken 
to be the series of percentage changes in the GDP deflator, that is, a series of inflation rates.
The Problems of Fixed Weights
To see why the BEA switched to the new procedure, let us consider a number of problems using 
fixed-price weights to compute real GDP. First, 1987 price weights, the last price weights the 
BEA used before it changed procedures, are not likely to be accurate for, say, 2014. Many struc-
tural changes took place in the U.S. economy between 1987 and 2014, and it seems unlikely that 
1987 prices are good weights to use for this much later period.
Another problem is that the use of fixed-price weights does not account for the responses 
in the economy to supply shifts. Perhaps bad weather leads to a lower production of oranges 
in year 2. In a simple supply-and-demand diagram for oranges, this corresponds to a shift of 
the supply curve to the left, which leads to an increase in the price of oranges and a decrease in 
the quantity demanded. As consumers move up the demand curve, they are substituting away 
from oranges. If technical advances in year 2 result in cheaper ways of producing computers, 
the result is a shift of the computer supply curve to the right, which leads to a decrease in the 
price of computers and an increase in the quantity demanded. Consumers are substituting 
toward computers. (You should be able to draw supply-and-demand diagrams for both cases.) 
Table 21.6 shows this tendency. The quantity of good A rose between years 1 and 2 and the price 
decreased (the computer case), whereas the quantity of good B fell and the price increased (the 
orange case). The computer supply curve has been shifting to the right over time, primarily 
because of technical advances. The result has been large decreases in the price of computers and 
large increases in the quantity demanded.
To see why these responses pose a problem for the use of fixed-price weights, consider the 
data in Table 21.6. Because the price of good A was higher in year 1, the increase in production of 
good A is weighted more if we use year 1 as the base year than if we used year 2 as the base year. 
Also, because the price of good B was lower in year 1, the decrease in production of good B is 
weighted less if we use year 1 as the base year. These effects make the overall change in real GDP 
larger if we use year 1 price weights than if we use year 2 price weights. Using year 1 price weights 
ignores the kinds of substitution responses discussed in the previous paragraph and leads to what 
many believe are too-large estimates of real GDP changes. In the past, the BEA tended to move the 
base year forward about every 5 years, resulting in the past estimates of real GDP growth being 
revised downward. It is undesirable to have past growth estimates change simply because of the 
change to a new base year. The new BEA procedure avoids many of these fixed-weight problems.
470 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
Similar problems arise when using fixed-quantity weights to compute price indexes. For 
example, the fixed-weight procedure ignores the substitution away from goods whose prices 
are increasing and toward goods whose prices are decreasing or increasing less rapidly. The 
procedure tends to overestimate the increase in the overall price level. As discussed in the next 
chapter, there are still a number of price indexes that are computed using fixed weights. The 
GDP deflator differs because it does not use fixed weights. It is also a price index for all the 
goods and services produced in the economy. Other price indexes cover fewer domestically 
produced goods and services but also include some imported (foreign-produced) goods and 
services.
It should finally be stressed that there is no “right” way of computing real GDP. The 
economy consists of many goods, each with its own price, and there is no exact way of adding 
together the production of the different goods. We can say that the BEA’s new procedure for 
computing real GDP avoids the problems associated with the use of fixed weights, and it seems 
to be an improvement over the old procedure. We will see in the next chapter, however, that the 
consumer price index (CPI)—a widely used price index—is still computed using fixed weights.
Limitations of the GDP Concept
We generally think of increases in GDP as good. Increasing GDP (or preventing its decrease) is 
usually considered one of the chief goals of the government’s macroeconomic policy. But there 
are some limitations to the use of GDP as a measure of welfare.
GDP and Social Welfare
If crime levels went down, society would be better off, but a decrease in crime is not an increase 
in output and is not reflected in GDP. Neither is an increase in leisure time. Yet to the extent 
that households want extra leisure time (instead of having it forced on them by a lack of jobs 
in the economy), an increase in leisure is also an increase in social welfare. Furthermore, some 
increases in social welfare are associated with a decrease in GDP. An increase in leisure during a 
time of full employment, for example, leads to a decrease in GDP because less time is spent on 
producing output.
Most nonmarket and domestic activities, such as housework and child care, are not counted 
in GDP even though they amount to real production. However, if I decide to send my children to 
day care or hire someone to clean my house or drive my car for me, GDP increases. The salaries 
of day care staff, cleaning people, and chauffeurs are counted in GDP, but the time I spend doing 
the same things is not counted. A mere change of institutional arrangements, even though no 
more output is being produced, can show up as a change in GDP.
Furthermore, GDP seldom reflects losses or social ills. GDP accounting rules do not adjust 
for production that pollutes the environment. The more production there is, the larger the GDP, 
regardless of how much pollution results in the process. The Economics in Practice box on the next 
page 471 discusses how counting for pollution affects GDP measures. GDP also has nothing to 
say about the distribution of output among individuals in a society. It does not distinguish, for 
example, between the case in which most output goes to a few people and the case in which 
 output is evenly divided among all people.
The Informal Economy
Many transactions are missed in the calculation of GDP even though, in principle, they should 
be counted. Most illegal transactions are missed unless they are “laundered” into legitimate 
business. Income that is earned but not reported as income for tax purposes is usually missed, 
although some adjustments are made in the GDP calculations to take misreported income into 
account. The part of the economy that should be counted in GDP but is not is sometimes called 
the informal economy.
21.4 Learning Objective
Discuss the limitations 
of  using GDP to measure 
well-being.
informal economy The part 
of the economy in which 
 transactions take place and in 
which income is generated that 
is unreported and therefore 
not counted in GDP.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 471 
E con o m i c s  i n  P r ac t i c E 
An Alternative to GDP: The Human Development Index
GDP and GNI are often used as indicators of economic 
welfare. However, there is ample dissatisfaction with both 
as measures of a nation’s overall well-being. During the 
second half of the 20th century, debates about the multiple 
dimensions of economic development led to the creation, in 
1990, of a new indicator—the Human Development Index 
(HDI). First introduced by the United Nations Development 
Program, an international development agency, it is now 
widely used to compare well-being across nations.
Comparing country classifications based on GNI per 
capita and HDI yields interesting results. While the two are 
strongly correlated, since the HDI already incorporates the 
GNI, some high-income countries exhibit lower HDI scores 
than lower-income countries. Norway, a small high-income 
country, has consistently topped the HDI chart while hav-
ing a lower gross national income than other countries such 
as Singapore or Kuwait. However, it neglects important 
aspects of a country’s well-being, such as human rights 
or political participation. It also provides only aggregate 
country-level measures and not the distribution of well-
being within countries, leading some economists to pro-
pose alternatives like a “household-based HDI”.1
ThiNkiNG PrAcTicAlly
1. What are the other aspects of a nation’s well-being you 
think are missing from both hDi and GDP (or GNi) 
measures?
1 Kenneth Harttgen and Stephan Klasen, “A household-based Human 
Development Index”, Proceedings of the German Development Economics 
Conference, Hannover 2010, No. 30.
Tax evasion is usually thought to be one of the major incentives for people in developed 
countries to participate in the informal economy. Studies estimate the size of the U.S. informal 
economy at about 10 percent, whereas Europe is closer to 20 percent. In the developing world, 
for a range of reasons, the informal economy is much larger, particularly for women workers. In 
Latin America and Africa, it is estimated that the informal economy comprises well more than a 
third of GDP in many nations.5
Why should we care about the informal economy? To the extent that GDP reflects only 
a part of economic activity instead of a complete measure of what the economy produces, 
it is misleading. Unemployment rates, for example, may be lower than officially measured if 
people work in the informal economy without reporting this fact to the government. Also, 
if the size of the informal economy varies among countries—as it does—we can be misled 
when we  compare GDP among countries. For example, Italy’s GDP would be much higher 
if we considered its informal sector as part of the economy, and Switzerland’s GDP would 
change very little.
Gross National Income per Capita
Making comparisons across countries is difficult because such comparisons need to be made in 
a single currency, generally U.S. dollars. Converting GNP numbers for Japan into dollars requires 
converting from yen into dollars. Because exchange rates can change quite dramatically in short 
periods of time, such conversions are tricky. Recently, the World Bank adopted a new measur-
ing system for international comparisons. The concept of gross national income (GNI) is GNP 
converted into dollars using an average of currency exchange rates over several years adjusted 
5 Jacques Chermes, “The Informal Economy,” Journal of Applied Economic Research, 2012.
gross national income 
(GNI) GNP converted into 
dollars using an average of 
currency exchange rates over 
several years adjusted for rates 
of inflation.
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
472 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
0
$10,000
$20,000
$30,000
$40,000
$50,000
$60,000
$70,000
Norway
Switzerland
United States
Netherlands
Sweden
Austria
Denmark
Germany
Canada
Belgium
Australia
Finland
United Kingdom
Japan
France
Ireland
Italy
Spain
Korea, Rep. of
Israel
Greece
Portugal
Czech Republic
Russian Federation
Hungary
Turkey
Chile
Mexico
Romania
Venezuela, R.B.
Brazil
South Africa
Colombia
China
Thailand
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Jordan
Indonesia
Philippines
India
Vietnam
Pakistan
Nigeria
Bangladesh
Kenya
Rwanda
Nepal
Ethiopia
U.S. dollars
▴
▴FIGuRE 21.1 National Income for Selected Countries, 2013
Source: Data from GNI per capita, PPP (current international $), The World Bank Group, Retrieved from http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP 
.PP.CD/countries/1W?display=default
for rates of inflation. Figure 21.1 lists the gross national income per capita (GNI divided by popu-
lation) for various countries in 2013. Of the countries in the figure, Norway had the highest 
per capita GNI, followed by Switzerland, the United States, and the Netherlands. Ethiopia was 
estimated to have per capita GNI of only $1,380 in 2013. This compares to $66,520 for Norway.
Looking Ahead
This chapter has introduced many key variables in which macroeconomists are interested, 
including GDP and its components. There is much more to be learned about the data that 
 macroeconomists use. In the next chapter, we will discuss the data on employment, unemploy-
ment, and the labor force. In Chapter 25, we will discuss the data on money and interest rates. 
Finally, in Chapter 34, we will discuss in more detail the data on the relationship between the 
United States and the rest of the world.
S u M M A R y 
1. One source of data on the key variables in the macroecon-
omy is the national income and product accounts. These accounts 
provide a conceptual framework that macroeconomists use 
to think about how the pieces of the economy fit together.
21.1 GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT p. 458 
2. Gross domestic product (GDP) is the key concept in national 
income accounting. GDP is the total market value of all 
final goods and services produced within a given period 
by factors of production located within a country. GDP 
excludes intermediate goods. To include goods when they are 
purchased as inputs and when they are sold as final prod-
ucts would be double counting and would result in an over-
statement of the value of production.
3. GDP excludes all transactions in which money or goods 
change hands but in which no new goods and services are 
produced. GDP includes the income of foreigners working 
in the United States and the profits that foreign compa-
nies earn in the United States. GDP excludes the income 
of U.S.  citizens working abroad and profits earned by U.S. 
 companies in foreign countries.
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 473 
4. Gross national product (GNP) is the market value of all final 
goods and services produced during a given period by 
factors of production owned by a country’s citizens.
21.2 CALCULATING GDP p. 460 
5. The expenditure approach to GDP adds up the amount spent 
on all final goods and services during a given period. The 
four main categories of expenditures are personal consumption 
expenditures (C), gross private domestic investment (I), government 
consumption and gross investment (G), and net exports (EX - IM). 
The sum of these categories equals GDP.
6. The three main components of personal consumption expendi-
tures (C) are durable goods, nondurable goods, and services.
7. Gross private domestic investment (I) is the total investment 
made by the private sector in a given period. There are 
three kinds of investment: nonresidential investment, residential 
 investment, and changes in business inventories. Gross invest-
ment does not take depreciation—the decrease in the value 
of  assets—into account. Net investment is equal to gross 
 investment minus depreciation.
8. Government consumption and gross investment (G) include ex-
penditures by state, federal, and local governments for final 
goods and services. The value of net exports (EX - IM) equals 
the differences between exports (sales to foreigners of U.S.-
produced goods and services) and imports (U.S. purchases 
of goods and services from abroad).
9. Because every payment (expenditure) by a buyer is a receipt 
(income) for the seller, GDP can be computed in terms of 
who receives it as income—the income approach to calculat-
ing gross domestic product.
10. GNP minus depreciation is net national product (NNP). 
National income is the total amount earned by the factors of 
production in the economy. It is equal to NNP except for a 
statistical discrepancy. Personal income is the total income of 
households. Disposable personal income is what households 
have to spend or save after paying their taxes. The personal 
saving rate is the percentage of disposable personal income 
saved instead of spent.
21.3 NOMINAL VERSUS REAL GDP p. 465 
11. GDP measured in current dollars (the current prices that 
one pays for goods) is nominal GDP. If we use nominal 
GDP to measure growth, we can be misled into thinking 
that production has grown when all that has happened is 
a rise in the price level, or inflation. A better measure of 
 production is real GDP, which is nominal GDP adjusted for 
price changes.
12. The GDP deflator is a measure of the overall  
price level.
21.4 LIMITATIONS OF ThE GDP CONCEPT p. 470 
13. We generally think of increases in GDP as good, but 
some problems arise when we try to use GDP as a mea-
sure of happiness or well-being. The peculiarities of 
GDP accounting mean that institutional changes can 
change the value of GDP even if real production has not 
changed. GDP ignores most social ills, such as pollution. 
Furthermore, GDP tells us nothing about what kinds of 
goods are being produced or how income is distributed 
across the population. GDP also ignores many transac-
tions of the informal economy.
14. The concept of gross national income (GNI) is GNP converted 
into dollars using an average of currency exchange rates 
over several years adjusted for rates of inflation.
R e v I e w  T e R M S  A N D  C O N C e P T S
base year, p. 468 
change in business inventories, p. 462 
compensation of employees, p. 463 
corporate profits, p. 463 
current dollars, p. 465 
depreciation, p. 462 
disposable personal income, or after-tax 
income, p. 465 
durable goods, p. 460 
expenditure approach, p. 460 
final goods and services, p. 458 
fixed-weight procedure, p. 468 
government consumption and gross  
investment (G), p. 463 
gross domestic product (GDP), p. 458 
gross investment, p. 462 
gross national income (GNI), p. 471 
gross national product (GNP), p. 459 
gross private domestic investment (I), p. 462 
income approach, p. 460 
indirect taxes minus subsidies, p. 463 
informal economy, p. 470 
intermediate goods, p. 458 
national income, p. 463 
national income and product accounts, p. 457 
net business transfer payments, p. 463 
 net exports (EX - IM), p. 463 
net interest, p. 463 
net investment, p. 462 
net national product (NNP), p. 464 
nominal GDP, p. 465 
nondurable goods, p. 460 
nonresidential investment, p. 462 
personal consumption expenditures (C), p. 460 
personal income, p. 465 
personal saving, p. 465 
personal saving rate, p. 465 
proprietors’ income, p. 463 
rental income, p. 463 
residential investment, p. 462 
services, p. 460 
statistical discrepancy, p. 464 
surplus of government enterprises, p. 464 
value added, p. 458 
weight, p. 467 
Equations:  
Expenditure approach to GDP:  
GDP = C + I + G + (EX - IM), p. 460 
GDP = Final sales + Change in business 
inventories, p. 462 
capitalend of period = capitalbeginning of period 
+ net investment, p. 463 
474 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
P R O b L e M S 
Similar problems are available on Myeconlab.
21.1 GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
Learning Objective: Describe GDP fundamentals and 
differentiate between GDP and GNP.
 1.1 Explain what double counting is and discuss why GDP is 
not equal to total sales.
 1.2 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 461] Which 
of the following transactions or activities would be 
counted in your country’s GDP? Explain your answers.
a. A transportation company acquires a fleet of second-hand 
vehicles.
b. The same transportation company acquires 1.000 gallons 
of gas from a foreign company deducted from the net 
 export component of GDP.
c. You buy 10 short-term government bonds.
d. A mining company acquires new government licenses to 
drill in land the company already owns.
e. You pay for a new haircut at your local hairdresser.
f. Foreign residents buy a bundle of your country’s food 
 specialties on an online retail site.
g. Your parents spend a whole day cooking meals to be 
handed out to their poorer neighbors.
h. The local government acquires furniture for newly built 
schools.
i. Two telecommunications companies merge.
j. A non-profit organization buys an apartment to lodge 
their headquarters.
k. You receive a large sum of money as bequest from a dead 
relative.
 1.3 Jacques, a resident of France, goes to Germany to buy 
a brand-new car for €15,600.00. He then brings the 
car back to France and sells it to another resident for 
€17,500.00. Which amount will be included in which 
country’s GDP, deducted from the net export compo-
nent of GDP?
 1.4 Anissa makes custom bird houses in her garage and she 
buys all her supplies from a local lumber yard. Last year 
she purchased $3,500 worth of supplies and produced 
250 bird houses. She sold all 250 bird houses to a local 
craft store for $25 each. The craft store sold all the bird 
houses to customers for $55 each. For the total bird 
house production, calculate the value added of Anissa 
and of the craft store.
21.2 CALCULATING GDP
Learning Objective: Explain two methods for calculating GDP.
 2.1 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 466] In 
a simple economy, suppose that all income is either 
compensation of employees or profits. Suppose also 
that there are no indirect taxes. Calculate gross domestic 
product from the following set of numbers. Show that the 
expenditure approach and the income approach add up to 
the same figure.
Consumption
$9,500
Investment
3,000
Depreciation
1,750
Profits
2,400
Exports
850
Compensation of employees
11,500
Government purchases
3,200
Direct taxes
1,200
Saving
1,600
Imports
900
 2.2 How do we know that calculating GDP by the 
 expenditure approach yields the same answer as 
 calculating GDP by the income approach?
 2.3 During 2002, real GDP in Japan rose about  
1.3 percent. During the same period, retail sales in 
Japan fell 1.8 percent in real terms. What are some  
possible  explanations for retail sales to consumers  
falling when GDP rises? (Hint: Think of the  
composition of GDP using the expenditure  
approach.)
 2.4 If you buy a new car, the entire purchase is counted 
as consumption in the year in which you make the 
transaction. Explain briefly why this is in one sense 
an “error” in national income accounting. (Hint: How 
is the purchase of a car different from the purchase of 
a pizza?) How might you correct this error? How is 
housing treated in the National Income and Product 
Accounts? Specifically how does owner-occupied 
housing enter into the  accounts? (Hint: Do some 
Web searching on “imputed rent on owner-occupied 
housing.”)
 2.5 Explain why imports are subtracted in the expenditure 
approach to calculating GDP.
 2.6 Beginning in 2005, the housing market, which had been 
booming for years, turned. Housing construction 
dropped sharply in 2006. Go to www.bea.gov. Look 
at the GDP  release and at past releases from 2005 to 
2015. In real dollars, how much private  residential fixed 
 investment (houses, apartments, condominiums, and 
 cooperatives) took place in each quarter from 2005 to 
2015? What portion of GDP did housing  construction 
represent? After 2006, residential fixed investment was 
declining sharply, yet GDP was  growing until the end of 
2007. What categories of aggregate spending kept things 
moving between 2006 and the end of 2007?
MyEconLab  Visit www.myeconlab.com to complete these exercises online and get instant  
feedback. Exercises that update with real-time data are marked with art 
.
ChaPter 21  Measuring National Output and National Income 475 
21.3 NOMINAL VERSUS REAL GDP
Learning Objective: Discuss the difference between real GDP 
and nominal GDP.
 3.1 The following table shows World Bank estimates for 
world GDP from 2005 to 2014, both in nominal and 
real terms (real GDP is calculated using a fixed weights 
method,  using 2005 as a base year). How do you explain 
the  discrepancy between nominal and real GDP in 2014? 
How do you explain the evolution of world’s real GDP 
growth rate from 2005 to 2014?
years
World GDP 
(constant 
2005 US$, 
million)
World  
GDP ( current 
US$, million)
% change in 
real GDP
% change in 
 nominal  
GDP
2005
47.033,72 
47.033,72 
–
–
2006
48.971,44 
50.971,47 
4.1%
8.4%
2007
50.899,06 
57.452,22 
3.9%
12.7%
2008
51.652,20 
62.982,83 
1.5%
9.6%
2009
50.582,34 
59.704,69 
-2.1%
-5.2%
2010
52.646,04 
65.489,20 
4.1%
9.7%
2011
54.142,01 
72.572,25 
2.8%
10.8%
2012
55.351,86 
74.041,59 
2.2%
2.0%
2013
56.652,81 
76.123,95 
2.4%
2.8%
2014
58.054,82 
77.868,77 
2.5%
2.3%
 3.2 New Zealand recently changed its method of calculat-
ing real GDP growth rate, substituting fixed weights 
with chain weights. What might explain such change in 
method? Are the differences between the two methods 
significant?
 3.3 The following table gives some figures from forecasts of 
real GDP (in 2005 dollars) and population done in mid-
2014. According to the forecasts, approximately how 
much real growth will there be between 2018 and 2019? 
What is the per-capita real GDP projected to be in 2018 
and in 2019? Compute the forecast rate of change in real 
GDP and per-capita real GDP between 2018 and 2019.
Real GDP 2018 (billions)
$18,121
Real GDP 2019 (billions)
$18,375
Population 2018 (millions)
329.3
Population 2019 (millions)
331.9
 3.4 Look at a recent edition of The Economist. Go to the 
section on economic indicators. Go down the list of 
countries and make a list of the ones with the fastest 
and slowest GDP growth. Look also at the forecast rates 
of GDP growth. Go back to the table of contents at 
the beginning of the journal to see if there are articles 
about any of these countries. Write a paragraph or two 
 describing the events or the economic conditions in one 
of the countries. Explain why they are growing or not 
growing rapidly.
 3.5 In the IMF’s Regional Economic Survey on the Asia-
Pacific Region (available at www.imf.org) it is expected 
that the growth outlook for the region in 2015 is “stable 
and robust”, with an estimated average GDP growth rate 
of 5.5%, a much higher rate than in other parts of the 
world (especially Western Europe). Building on data from 
this survey and your own research, compare this rate to 
the GDP growth rate obtained in the past few years. How 
do you assess this evolution of the GDP growth rate in the 
region in terms of recession and expansion? What may be 
the causes of such slowdown?
 3.6 Gorgonzola is a small island nation with a simple economy 
that produces only six goods: sugar cane, yo-yos, rum, 
peanuts, harmonicas, and peanut butter. Assume that one-
quarter of all the sugar cane is used to produce rum and one-
half of all the peanuts are used to produce peanut butter.
a. Use the production and price information in the table to 
calculate nominal GDP for 2015.
b. Use the production and price information in the table to 
calculate real GDP for 2013, 2014, and 2015 using 2013 as 
the base year. What is the growth rate of real GDP from 
2013 to 2014 and from 2014 to 2015?
c. Use the production and price information in the table to 
calculate real GDP for 2013, 2014, and 2015 using 2014 as 
the base year. What is the growth rate of real GDP from 
2013 to 2014 and from 2014 to 2015?
2013
2014
2015
Product
Quantity Price
Quantity Price Quantity Price
Sugar cane
240
$0.80
240
$1.00
300
$1.15
Yo-yos
600
 2.50
700
 3.00
750
 4.00
Rum
150
10.00
160
12.00
180
15.00
Peanuts
500
 2.00
450
 2.50
450
 2.50
Harmonicas
 75
25.00
 75
30.00
 85
30.00
Peanut butter
100
 4.50
 85
 4.50
 85
 5.00
 3.7 Below is data on Germany’s GDP extracted from 
Eurostat, the European Union’s statistical office, for the 
period 2005–2014. Real GDP is calculated with a fixed 
weight method and 2005 as the base year. Fill the table 
by calculating (i) the GDP deflator for each year; (ii) the 
change in price level, in percentage terms.
Real GDP
Nominal 
GDP
GDP 
deflator
% change 
in price 
level
2005
2.297,82 
2.297,82 
2006
2.383,07 
2.390,20 
2007
2.460,99 
2.510,11 
2008
2.486,88 
2.558,02 
2009
2.346,67 
2.456,66 
2010
2.442,67 
2.576,22 
2011
2.530,36 
2.699,10 
2012
2.539,89
2.749,90 
2013
2.542,58 
2.809,48
2014
2.583,37
2.903,79
 3.8 Evaluate the following statement: Even if the prices of 
a large number of goods and services in the economy 
increase dramatically, the real GDP for the economy can 
still fall, but if the prices of a large number of goods and 
services in the economy decrease dramatically, the real 
GDP for the economy cannot rise.
476 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
21.4 LIMITATIONS OF ThE GDP CONCEPT
Learning Objective: Discuss the limitations of using GDP to 
measure well-being.
 4.1 GDP calculations do not directly include the economic 
costs of environmental damage—for example, global 
warming and acid rain. Do you think these costs  
should be included in GDP? Why or why not? How 
could GDP be amended to include environmental  
damage costs?
 4.2 [related to the Economics in Practice on p. 471] A 
World Bank brief entitled Natural Capital Accounting con-
tains the following statement: “(A) major limitation of 
GDP is the limited representation of natural capital. The 
full contribution of natural capital like forests, wetlands, 
and agricultural land does not show up.” Identify some 
additional examples of natural capital and explain how 
limited representation of these types of natural capital 
could affect the measurement of gross domestic product.
Source: Natural Capital Accounting, World Bank brief, May 20, 2015.
477 
22 
Each month the U.S. Bureau of 
Labor Statistics (BLS) announces 
the value of the unemployment 
rate for the previous month. 
For example, on April 3, 2015, 
it  announced that the unem-
ployment rate for March 2015 
was 5.5 percent. The unem-
ployment rate is a key measure 
of how the economy is doing. 
This  announcement is widely 
watched, and if the announced 
unemployment rate is different 
from what the financial markets 
expect, there can be large move-
ments in those markets. It is thus 
important to know how the BLS computes the  unemployment rate. The first part of this chapter 
describes how the unemployment rate is computed and  discusses its various components.
Inflation is another key macroeconomic variable. The previous chapter discussed how 
the GDP deflator, the price deflator for the entire economy, is computed. The percentage 
change in the GDP deflator is a measure of inflation. There are, however, other measures of 
inflation, each pertaining to some part of the economy. The most widely followed price index 
is the consumer price index (CPI), and its measurement is discussed in this chapter. The CPI is 
also announced monthly by the BLS, and this announcement is widely followed by the finan-
cial markets as well. For example, on March 24, 2015, the BLS announced that the percentage 
change in the CPI for February 2015 was 0.2 percent for the month. After discussing the mea-
surement of the CPI, this chapter discusses various costs of inflation as well as the concerns 
policy makers might have when there is deflation (a fall in the price level). 
The last topic considered in this chapter is long-run growth. Although much of mac-
roeconomics is concerned with explaining business cycles, long-run growth is also a major 
concern. The  average yearly growth rate of U.S. real GDP depicted in Figure 20.2 in Chapter 
20 is 3.3  percent. Although there were many ups and downs during the 115 years depicted in 
Figure 20.2, on average, the economy was growing at an annual 3.3 percent rate. In the last part 
of this  chapter, we discuss the sources of this growth.
Keep in mind that this chapter is still descriptive. We begin our analysis of how the economy 
works in the next chapter.
Unemployment, 
Inflation, and Long-
Run Growth
Chapter Outline 
and learning 
ObjeCtives 
22.1 Unemployment 
p. 478
Explain how unemployment 
is measured.
22.2 Inflation and 
Deflation p. 483
Describe the tools used 
to measure inflation and 
 discuss the costs and effects 
of inflation.
22.3 Long-Run 
Growth p. 487
Discuss the components 
and implications of 
 long-run growth.
Looking Ahead p. 489
478 Part IV Concepts and Problems in Macroeconomics 
Unemployment
We begin our discussion of unemployment with its measurement.
Measuring Unemployment
The unemployment data released each month by the BLS are based on a survey of 60,000 house-
holds. Each interviewed household answers questions concerning the work activity of household 
members 16 years of age or older during the calendar week that contains the 12th of the month. 
(The survey is conducted in the week that contains the 19th of the month.)
If a household member 16 years of age or older worked 1 hour or more as a paid employee, 
either for someone else or in his or her own business or farm, the person is classified as 
employed. A household member is also considered employed if he or she worked 15 hours or 
more without pay in a family enterprise. Finally, a household member is counted as employed 
if the person held a job from which he or she was temporarily absent because of illness, bad 
weather, vacation,  labor-management disputes, or personal reasons, regardless of whether he 
or she was paid.
Those who are not employed fall into one of two categories: (1) unemployed or (2) not in 
the labor force. To be considered unemployed, a person must be 16 years old or older, available 
for work, and have made specific efforts to find work during the previous 4 weeks. A person 
not looking for work because he or she does not want a job or has given up looking is classi-
fied as not in the labor force. People not in the labor force include full-time students, retirees, 
individuals in institutions, those staying home to take care of children, and discouraged job 
seekers.
The total labor force in the economy is the number of people employed plus the number of 
unemployed:
22.1 Learning Objective
Explain how unemployment is 
measured.
employed Any person 16 
years old or older (1) who 
works for pay, either for some-
one else or in his or her own 
business for 1 or more hours 
per week, (2) who works with-
out pay for 15 or more hours 
per week in a family enterprise, 
or (3) who has a job but has 
been temporarily absent with 
or without pay.
unemployed A person  
16 years old or older who is 
not working, is available for 
work, and has made specific 
efforts to find work during the 
 previous 4 weeks.
not in the labor force A 
person who is not looking for 
work because he or she does 
not want a job or has given up 
looking.
labor force The number of 
people employed plus the 
number of unemployed.
labor force = employed + unemployed
The total population 16 years of age or older is equal to the number of people in the labor force 
plus the number not in the labor force:
population = labor force + not in labor force
With these numbers, several ratios can be calculated. The unemployment rate is the ratio of the 
number of people unemployed to the total number of people in the labor force:
unemployment rate The ratio 
of the number of people unem-
ployed to the total number of 
people in the labor force.
unemployment rate =
unemployed
employed + unemployed
In March 2015, the labor force contained 156.906 million people, 148.331 million of whom 
were employed and 8.575 million of whom were unemployed and looking for work. The 
 unemployment rate was 5.5 percent:
8.575
148.331 + 8.575 = 5.5%
The ratio of the labor force to the population 16 years old or over is called the labor force 
participation rate:
labor force participation rate  
The ratio of the labor force to 
the total population 16 years 
old or older.
labor force participation rate = labor force
population
